---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/privacy/
lang: es
title: Privacy policy
---


# Privacy policy

We invite you to carefully read this privacy policy which explains what personal information we collect, hold or process about you, your rights and obligations and how you can enforce them.

Without your explicit consent, this Website does not collect or store your Personal Data, except for the essential hosting and infrastructure services it requires to function.

In addition, and only with your explicit consent, Personal Data is collected by third-party services. You can disable these third-party services by declining your consent at any time.

Any capitalised terms are defined at the end of this policy.

---
## Types of Data collected

Among the types of Personal Data that this Website collects, by itself or through third parties, there are: Cookies; Usage Data; Personal data provided by you.

Details on each type of Personal Data collected are provided in this privacy policy or by specific explanation texts displayed prior to the Data collection.

Personal Data may be freely provided by the User, or, in case of Usage Data, collected automatically when using this Application.

Any use of Cookies by this website or by the owners of third-party services used by this Website serves the purpose of providing the service required by the User. Cookies help us to provide you with a good experience when you browse the Global Ecosystem Typology Website and allows us to improve it. To remember your third-party cookie preference, this Website uses a cookie.

Personal Data is collected for the following purposes and using the following services:

### Essential hosting and infrastructure services: 

**Firebase**

We use Firebase to host this Website.

Personal Data: Firebase Hosting uses IP addresses of incoming requests to detect abuse and provide customers with detailed analysis of usage data, and may collect other types of data as specified in the privacy policy of the service. 

Place of processing: United States

For more information on privacy and security in Firebase, see [firebase.google.com/support/privacy](https://firebase.google.com/support/privacy).

**GitHub**

Hosting content and map data

Personal Data: various types of Data as specified in the privacy policy of the service 

Place of processing: United States

See GitHub Privacy Statement:
[docs.github.com/en/github/site-policy/github-privacy-statement](https://docs.github.com/en/github/site-policy/github-privacy-statement)

**Mapbox**

Mapbox is a maps visualization service provided by Mapbox Inc. that allows this Website to incorporate maps on its pages.

Personal Data: Cookies; Usage Data, as specified in the privacy policy of the service.

Place of processing: United States

Privacy Policy: [mapbox.com/legal/privacy/](https://mapbox.com/legal/privacy/)

### Non-essential services:

**Google Forms**

With your consent, we use Google Forms for collecting feedback. Google Drive is a service to save and manage data collected, provided by Google LLC.
We use your email address to communicate with you, if provided by you, and only for the purposes requested by you. 

Personal Data: various types of Data as specified in the privacy policy of the service.

Place of processing: United States

Privacy Policy: [policies.google.com/privacy](https://policies.google.com/privacy), Privacy Shield participant

**Google Analytics**

With your consent, we may use Google Analytics, a web analytics service offered by Google that tracks and reports website traffic. Google uses the data collected to track and monitor the use of our Service. This data is shared with other Google services.

You can also opt-out of having your activity available to Google Analytics by installing the Google Analytics opt-out browser add-on. The add-on prevents the Google Analytics JavaScript (ga.js, analytics.js, and dc.js) from sharing information with Google Analytics about visits activity.

Personal Data: various types of Data as specified in the privacy policy of the service.

Place of processing: United States

Privacy Policy: [policies.google.com/privacy](https://policies.google.com/privacy), Privacy Shield participant

---
## External Links

This website contains links to other external websites for your convenience and should not be construed as constituting any endorsement or approval of the external websites’ content. We take reasonable care in linking external websites but have no direct control over their content or the changes that may occur to the content on those external websites.

If you access external websites using the links provided, the operators of those websites may collect personal information from you that will be used by them in accordance with their own privacy policies. It is your responsibility to check in each specific case if such websites secure your personal information from unauthorized access, use or disclosure.

---
## Transfer of Data

Your information, including Personal Data, may be transferred to — and maintained on — computers located outside of your state, province, country or other governmental jurisdiction where the data protection laws may differ than those from your jurisdiction.

We will take all steps reasonably necessary to ensure that your data is treated securely and in accordance with this Privacy Policy and no transfer of your Personal Data will take place to an organization or a country unless there are adequate controls in place including the security of your data and other personal information.

Your consent to this Privacy Policy followed by your submission of such information represents your agreement to that transfer.

---
## The Rights of Users

Users may exercise certain rights regarding their data processed by this Website.

In particular, users have the right to do the following:

- Withdraw their consent at any time. Users have the right to withdraw consent where they have previously given their consent to the processing of their Personal Data.
- Object to processing of their Data. Users have the right to object to the processing of their Data if the processing is carried out on a legal basis other than consent. 
- Access their Data. Users have the right to learn if Data is being processed by this Website, obtain disclosure regarding certain aspects of the processing and obtain a copy of the Data undergoing processing.
- Verify and seek rectification. Users have the right to verify the accuracy of their Data and ask for it to be updated or corrected.
- Restrict the processing of their Data. Users have the right, under certain circumstances, to restrict the processing of their Data. 
- Have their Personal Data deleted or otherwise removed. Users have the right, under certain circumstances, to obtain the erasure of their Data.
- Lodge a complaint. Users have the right to bring a claim before their competent data protection authority.

**How to exercise these rights**

Any requests to exercise user rights can be directed via the contact on this page. 

---
## Security of Personal Data

We are committed to protecting the security of your Personal Data. Any Personal Data provided to us by you is handled with due care and security, and will not be used in ways other than as specified in this privacy policy, or in any site/area-specific policies, or in ways to which you have not explicitly consented.

Persons who have access to your Personal Data or are involved in processing your Personal Data are obliged to respect the confidentiality of all such Personal Data and abide by applicable data protection principles.

We keep your Personal Data for as long as it is necessary to fulfil the purpose for which it was collected or to comply with legal or regulatory requirements.

The security of your Personal Data is important to us, but remember that no method of transmission over the Internet, or method of electronic storage, is 100% secure. While we strive to use commercially acceptable means to protect your Personal Data, we cannot guarantee its absolute security.

---
## Changes to this Privacy Policy

We may update our Privacy Policy from time to time. We will notify you of any changes by posting the new Privacy Policy on this page, and update the date at the bottom of this page.

You are advised to review this Privacy Policy periodically for any changes. Changes to this Privacy Policy are effective when they are posted on this page.

---
## Contact Us

If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, or would like to exercise your data access rights as a User, you can contact us at: rle-contact@iucn.org.

For general queries use our [feedback form](https://global-ecosystems.org/page/feedback).

---
## Definitions

- **Personal Data:** Personal Data means data about a living individual who can be identified from those data (or from those and other information either in our possession or likely to come into our possession).
- **Usage Data:** Usage Data is data collected automatically either generated by the use of the Service or from the Service infrastructure itself (for example, the duration of a page visit).
- **Cookies:** Cookies are small pieces of data stored on a User's device.
- **This Website:** The means by which the Personal Data of the User is collected and processed.
- **User:** The User is the individual using our Service. The User corresponds to the Data Subject, who is the subject of Personal Data.


---

_Latest update: August 10th, 2020_
