---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/terms/
lang: es
title: Terms of use
---


# Terms of use

This web page represents our Terms of Use regarding this website. By using this website, you agree to be bound by these Terms of Use. We may amend these Terms of Use at any time by posting the amended terms on our Website. 

## Copyrights and Ownership
All images, text, and other materials posted on this website are subject to copyrights owned by The Global Ecosystem Typology, IUCN or other individuals or entities and are protected by international copyright laws. 

With the exception of photographs, reproduction of this website’s content for educational or other non-commercial purposes is authorized without prior written permission from the copyright holder, provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of this website’s content for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without prior written permission of the copyright holder.

When sharing text from our website online, we ask that you credit us and link back to our web site – and preferably directly to the page on which you found the original content. 

Due to copyrights, we cannot authorize you to use or share any images from this site without specific permission, unless they are already licenced for reuse under a Creative Commons licence and labelled as such.

All logos and trademarks referred to or appearing on this site are the property of their respective owners.

## Accuracy of information
All reasonable endeavours have been used to ensure the accuracy and updating of the content of this Website. However, no warranty is given to that effect, nor is any liability accepted by the Global Ecosystem Typology for any loss or damage arising from the use of this Website.

### Disclaimer on frontiers and national boundaries
The designation of geographical entities on this website do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of The Global Ecosystem Typology, IUCN or other participating organisations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

### Links to Third-Party Websites
Our Website contains links to Websites owned or operated by parties other than The Global Ecosystem Typology. Such links are provided for your reference only. We do not monitor or control outside Websites and are not responsible for their content. 




---
_Latest update: December 1st, 2020_
