---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_3_2
content-id: T3.2
lang: en
title: T3.2 Seasonally dry temperate heath and shrublands
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:09:39'
---

These temperate ecosystems are dominated by sclerophyll shrubs with small or ericoid leaves. A low sparse tree canopy may or may not be present. Low-moderate productivity is limited by summer droughts and low nutrient availability. and sandy or loamy soils, with many diverse plant specialisations to low nutrient, and regular fires, accelerated by slow decomposition rates. Foodwebs vary from complex to simple, but most lack large herbivores and predators. Vertebrate herbivores have specialisations to exploit low nutrient vegetation and avoid recurring fires, which are influential on plant and animal life histories. Specific plant-invertebrate relationships (e.g. as larval hosts and pollinators) are common (moths and butterflies larval hosts, wasp pollinators).

# Ecological Traits
 
Sclerophyllous, evergreen shrublands are distinctive ecosystems of humid and subhumid climates in mid-latitudes. Their low-moderate productivity is fuelled by autochthonous energy sources and is limited by resource constraints and/or recurring disturbance. Vegetation is dominated by shrubs with very low SLA, high C:N ratios, shade-intolerance, and long-lived, small, often ericoid leaves, with or without a low, open canopy of sclerophyll trees. The ground layer may include geophytes and sclerophyll graminoids, though less commonly true grasses. Trophic webs are simple, with large mammalian predators scarce or absent, and low densities of vertebrate herbivores. Native browsers may have local effects on vegetation. Diversity and local endemism may be high among vascular plants and invertebrate consumers. Plants and animals have morphological, ecophysiological, and life-history traits that promote persistence under summer droughts, nutrient poverty, and recurring fires, which play a role in top-down regulation. Stomatal regulation and root architecture promote drought tolerance in plants. Cluster roots and acid exudates, mycorrhizae, and insectivory promote nutrient capture, while cellulose, lignin, exudate production, and leaf longevity promote nutrient conservation in plants. Vertebrate herbivores and granivores possess specialised dietary and digestive traits enabling consumption of foliage with low nutrient content and secondary compounds. Decomposition rates are slow, allowing litter-fuel accumulation to add to well-aerated fine fuels in shrub canopies. Life-history traits such as recovery organs, serotiny, post-fire seedling recruitment, pyrogenic flowering, and fire-related germination cues promote plant survival, growth, and reproduction under recurring canopy fires. Animals evade fires in burrows or through mobility. Animal pollination syndromes are common (notably dipterans, lepidopterans, birds, and sometimes mammals) and ants may be prominent in seed dispersal.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
A marked summer water deficit and a modest winter surplus is driven by high summer temperatures and evapotranspiration with winter-maximum or aseasonal rainfall patterns. Winters are mild, or cool at high elevations. Sandy soil textures or reverse-texture effects of clay-loams exacerbate an overall water deficit. Soils are typically acid, derived from siliceous sand deposits, sandstones, or acid intrusives or volcanics, and are low to very low in P, N, and mineral cations (though this varies between regions, e.g, base-rich limestones, marl and dolomites in southern Europe). The climate, soils, and vegetation promote summer canopy fires at decadal to multi-decadal intervals. Positive feedbacks between fire and vegetation may be important in maintaining flammability.
 
# Distribution
 
Mediterranean-type climate regions of Europe, north and south Africa, southern Australia, western North and South America, and occurrences in non-Mediterranean climates in eastern Australia, the USA, and Argentina.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al. 2017), global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, and experts.

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith and J Loidi.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

### Main references
* Keeley JE, Bond WJ, Bradstock RA, Pausas, JG, Rundel PW  (2012) **Fire in Mediterranean Ecosystems: ecology, evolution and management** Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
* Lamont BB, Keith DA  (2017) *Heathlands and associated shrublands*. **Australian vegetation** (Ed. DA Keith), pp 339-368. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN [978-1-107-11843-0](http://www.cambridge.org/9781107118430).

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
