---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_1_3
content-id: T1.3
lang: en
title: T1.3 Tropical/Subtropical montane rainforests
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-15 11:32:28'
---

These mountain rainforests are characterised by a single-layered tree canopy, with epiphytic ferns, bryophytes, lichens, orchids, and bromeliads draping tree branches. Grasses are rare or absent. At high altitude forest structure becomes less complex, with dwarf tree forms. Although rainfall is abundant (up to 6000 mm per year), productivity is limited by cool temperatures, wind exposure and shallow soils, although under the canopy a moist shady microclimate provides stable habitat for a frog, bird, plant and invertebrate species that are found nowhere else.

# Ecological Traits
 
Closed-canopy evergreen forests on tropical mountains usually have a single-layer low tree canopy (~5–20m tall) with small leaf sizes (microphyll-notophyll) and high SLA. They transition to lowland rainforests ([T1.1](/explore/groups/T1.1)) with decreasing altitude and to warm temperate forests ([T2.4](/explore/groups/T2.4)) at subtropical latitudes. Structure and taxonomic diversity become more diminutive and simpler with altitude, culminating in elfinwood forms. Conspicuous epiphytic ferns, bryophytes, lichens, orchids, and bromeliads drape tree branches and exploit atmospheric moisture (cloud stripping), but grasses are rare or absent, except for bamboos in some areas. Moderate productivity is fuelled by autochthonous energy, limited by cool temperatures, possibly by high exposure to UV-B radiation, and sometimes by shallow soil and/or wind exposure. Growth and reproductive phenology is usually seasonal. Plant propagules are dispersed mostly by wind and territorial birds and mammals. Taxonomic diversity is moderate to low, especially in the tree canopy, but there is often high local endemism at higher altitudes in most groups, especially amphibians, birds, plants, and invertebrates. Gap-phase dynamics are driven by individual tree-fall or lightning strikes, more rarely by extreme wind storms in some areas. Seedling banks are common (seedbanks are uncommon) and most plants are shade tolerant and can recruit in the shade.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Substantial cloud moisture and high humidity underpin a reliable year-round rainfall surplus over evapotranspiration. Altitudinal gradients in temperature, precipitation, and exposure are pivotal in ecosystem structure and function. Frequent cloud cover from orographic uplift and closed tree canopies maintain a moist microclimate and shady conditions. Temperatures are mild-cool with occasional frost. Seasonal variability is low-moderate but diurnal variability is moderate-high. Winter monthly mean minima may be around 0°C in some areas. Landslides are a significant form of disturbance that drives successional dynamics on steep slopes and is exacerbated by extreme rainfall events. Mountains experience elevated UV-B radiation with altitude and, in some regions, are exposed to local or regional storms.
 
# Distribution
 
Humid tropical and subtropical regions in East Africa, East Madagascar, Southeast Asia, west Oceania, northeast Australia, Central and tropical South America.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al. 2017), global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, and experts.

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith, NA Brummitt, KR Young, RT Corlett and A Etter.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-15.

### Main references
* Ashton PS, Seidler R (2014) **On the forests of tropical Asia: lest the memory fade** Kew Publishing: Kew.
* Gradstein SR, Homeier J, Gansert D  (2008) *The tropical mountain forest – patterns and processes in a biodiversity hotspot*. **The tropical mountain forest – patterns and processes in a biodiversity hotspot** Biodiversity and Ecology Series 2. Göttingen, Centre for Biodiversity and Ecology. DOI: [10.17875/gup2008-702](http://doi.org/10.17875/gup2008-702)
* Hamilton LS, Juvik JO, Scatena FN  (1995) *Tropical Montane Cloud Forests*. **Ecological Studies** 110. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
