---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/tf_1_4
content-id: TF1.4
lang: en
title: TF1.4 Seasonal floodplain marshes
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Seasonal flooding and drying regimes characterise high productivity floodplain marshes in the seasonal tropics and subhumid temperate regions. Typically, different plants respond to the mosaic of variable flooding regimes, supporting complex networks of invertebrates, waterbirds, reptiles, and mammals. Prey concentrate as the wetlands dry, and many plants and animals use specialised adaptations such as seed banks or egg banks, to survive drying.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
This group includes high-productivity floodplain wetlands fed regularly by large inputs of allochthonous resources that drive strong bottom-up regulation, and smaller areas of disconnected oligotrophic wetlands. Functionally diverse autotrophs include phytoplankton, algal mats and epiphytes, floating and amphibious herbs and graminoids, and semi-terrestrial woody plants. Interactions of fine-scale spatial gradients in anoxia and desiccation are related to differential flooding. These gradients shape ecosystem assembly by enabling species with diverse life-history traits to exploit different niches, resulting in strong local zonation of vegetation and high patch-level diversity of habitats for consumers. Wetland mosaics include very productive and often extensive grasses, sedges and forbs (sedges dominate oligotrophic systems) that persist through dry seasons largely as dormant seeds or subterranean organs, as well as groves of woody perennials that are less tolerant of prolonged anoxia but access ground water or arrest growth during dry phases. Productive and functionally diverse autotrophs support complex trophic networks with zooplankton, aquatic invertebrates, fish, amphibians, reptiles, aquatic mammals, waterbirds, and terrestrial animals with diverse dietary and foraging strategies. During dry phases, obligate aquatic organisms are confined to wet refugia. Others, including many invertebrates, have dormancy traits allowing persistence during dry phases. Very high abundances and diversities of invertebrates, waterbirds, reptiles, and mammals exploit resource availability, particularly when prey are concentrated during drawdown phases of floods. Reproduction and recruitment, especially of fish, coincide with food availability cued by flood regimes.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Regular seasonal flooding and drying is driven by river flow regimes, reflecting seasonal precipitation or melt patterns in catchments. Salinity gradients and tides influence these marshes where they adjoin estuaries, with brackish marshes on transitions to [TF1.2](/explore/groups/TF1.2), [TF1.3](/explore/groups/TF1.3) and [MFT1.3](/explore/groups/MFT1.3). Disconnected oligotrophic systems rely on rainfall and low substrate permeability for seasonal waterlogging. Seasonal flood extent and duration vary inter-annually, especially in temperate zones. Geomorphic heterogeneity in the depositional floodplains promote spatial and temporal variability in moisture status, creating contrasting patches including perennially inundated refuges and dry ‘islands’ that seldom flood and dry rapidly. Substrates are fertile alluvia or infertile white sands with variable grain sizes, moisture, and organic content that reflect fine-scale depositional patterns and hydrological gradients. Fires may occur in dry seasons, releasing resources, changing vegetation structure and composition, consuming organic substrates and lowering the wetland surface.
 
# Distribution
 
Throughout the seasonal tropics and subhumid temperate regions of the world.

Major occurrences of freshwater marshes and floodplains were taken from the Global Lakes and Wetlands Database (Lehner and Döll 2004). Occurrences in boreal and polar climates were excluded by removing KoeppnGeiger_classes>26 in Beck _et al._ (2018). Additional areas with minor occurrences identified in selected freshwater ecoregions (Abell _et al._ 2008). Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identifed in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.

## References

**Citation**: DA Keith, RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, B Robson, JA Catford, MC Rains, K Irvine, KM Rodriguez-Clark and A Etter. (2020). *TF1.4 Seasonal floodplain marshes*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. DOI:[10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en](https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: TF1.4.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

### Main references
* Damasceno-Junior GA., Semir J, Dos Santos FAM, de Freitas Leitão-Filho H  (2005) *Structure, distribution of species and inundation in a riparian forest of Rio Paraguai, Pantanal, Brazil*. **Flora-Morphology, Distribution, Functional Ecology of Plants** 200:119-135.

### Map references
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P  (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*. **BioScience** 58: 403–414. [Data-set](http://www.feow.org). DOI: [10.1641/B580507](http://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Beck, H., Zimmermann, N., McVicar, T. et al. (2018) *Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution*. **Sci Data** 5, 180214. DOI: [10.1038/sdata.2018.214](http://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.214)
* Lehner, B. and Döll, P.  (2004) *Development and validation of a global database of lakes, reservoirs and wetlands*. **Journal of Hydrology** 296/1-4: 1-22. [Data-set](https://www.worldwildlife.org/pages/global-lakes-and-wetlands-database). DOI: [10.1016/j.jhydrol.2004.03.028](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2004.03.028)
