---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_4_1
content-id: T4.1
lang: en
title: T4.1 Trophic savannas
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:19:04'
---

An unparalleled abundance and diversity of large herbivores maintain an open structure of these tree-grass ecosystems in the seasonal tropics of Africa and south Asia. Large herbivores are pivotal in maintaining short rhizomatous and tussock grasses, limiting recruitment of trees, cycling nutrients, sustaining complex food webs of invertebrate detritivores and diverse assemblages of mammalian and avian predators and scavengers. Seasonally high productivity coincides with the summer rainy season. Fires occur in some years, but are less influential than herbivores on ecosystem function. Trees and grasses have adaptations to seasonal drought and heavy browsing, such as rhizomes and stolons that allow grasses to spread under grazing pressure.

# Ecological Traits
 
These grassy woodlands and grasslands are dominated by C<sub>4</sub> grasses with stoloniferous, rhizomatous and tussock growth forms that are kept short by vertebrate grazers. Trophic savannas (relative to pyric savannas, [T4.2](/explore/groups/T4.2)) have unique plant and animal diversity within a complex trophic structure dominated by abundant mammalian herbivores and predators. These animals are functionally differentiated in body size, mouth morphology, diet, and behaviour. They promote fine-scale vegetation heterogeneity and dominance of short grass species, sustaining the system through positive feedbacks and limiting fire fuels. Trees and grasses possess functional traits that promote tolerance to chronic herbivory as well as seasonal drought. Seasonal high productivity coincides with summer rains. The dry season induces grass curing and leaf fall in deciduous and semi-deciduous woody plants. Trees are shade-intolerant during their establishment and most develop chemical (e.g. phenolics) or physical (e.g. spinescence) herbivory defence traits and an ability to re-sprout as they enter the juvenile phase. Their soft microphyll-notophyll foliage has relatively high SLA and low C:N ratios, as do grasses. Robust root systems and stolons/rhizomes enable characteristic grasses to survive and spread under heavy grazing. As well as vertebrate herbivores and predators, vertebrate scavengers and invertebrate detritivores are key components of the trophic network and carbon cycle. Nitrogen fixation, recycling, and deposition by animals exceeds volatilisation.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Trophic savannas like pyric savannas are driven by seasonal climates but generally occupy environmental niches with lower rainfall and higher soil fertility. High annual rainfall deficit of 400 mm to >1,800 mm. Annual rainfall generally varies from 300 mm to 700 mm, always with strong seasonal (winter) drought, but these savanna types are restricted to landscapes with sufficient water bodies (rivers and lakes) to sustain high densities of large mammals. Temperatures are warm-hot with low-moderate variability through the year. Low intensity fires have return intervals of 5–50 years, depending on animal densities and inter-annual rainfall variation, usually after the growing season, removing much of the remaining biomass not consumed by herbivores. Soils are moderately fertile and often have a significant clay component.
 
# Distribution
 
Seasonal tropics and subtropics of Africa and Asia.

Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu _et al._ 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.

## References

**Citation**: CER Lehmann and DA Keith. (2020). 'T4.1 Trophic savannas'. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

**Map version**: T4.1.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-12-01.

### Main references
* Archibald S, Hempson GP  (2016) *Competing consumers: contrasting the patterns and impacts of fire and mammalian herbivory in Africa*. **Phil Trans R Soc B** 371: 20150309.
* Hempson GP, Archibald S, Bond WJ, Ellis RP, Grant CC, Kruger FJ, et al.  (2015) *Ecology of grazing lawns in Africa*. **Biological Reviews** 90: 979–994.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
