---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_2_4
content-id: T2.4
lang: en
title: T2.4 Warm temperate laurophyll forests
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 20:54:51'
---

With a patchy warm-temperate distribution, laurophyll forests are extensive in some regions, but more typically occupy topographic refugia in a matrix of drier, more fire-prone ecosystems. They have glossy- or leathery-leaved dense evergreen canopies, with moderate tree diversity. A mild climate, and more acid soils, distinguish them from oceanic cool temperate forests ([T2.3](/explore/groups/T2.3)). Primary productivity is high, but can be limited by mild summer drought. Decomposers such as invertebrates, fungi, and microbes on the forest floor are critical to nutrient cycling. Insects are the major consumers of primary production and a major food source for birds and bats, which can be important seed-dispersers and pollinators. Vertebrate herbivores are relatively uncommon.

# Ecological Traits
 
Relatively productive but structurally simple closed-canopy forests with high LAI occur in humid warm-temperate to subtropical climates. The tree canopies are more uniform than most tropical forests ([T1.1](/explore/groups/T1.1) and [T1.2](/explore/groups/T1.2)) and usually lack large emergents. Their foliage is often leathery and glossy (laurophyll) with intermediate SLA values, notophyll-microphyll sizes, and prodigiously evergreen. Deciduous species are rarely scattered within the forest canopies. These features, and drier, warmer climates and often more acid soils distinguish them from oceanic cool temperate forests ([T2.3](/explore/groups/T2.3)), while in the subtropics they transition to T1 forests. Autochthonous energy supports relatively high primary productivity, weakly limited by summer drought and sometimes by acid substrates. Forest function is regulated mainly by bottom-up processes related to resource competition rather than top-down trophic processes or disturbance regimes. Trophic structure is simpler than in tropical forests, with moderate levels of diversity and endemism among major taxa (e.g. typically <20 tree spp./ha), but local assemblages of birds, bats, and canopy invertebrates may be abundant and species-rich and play important roles in pollination and seed dispersal. Canopy insects are the major consumers of primary production and a major food source for birds. Decomposers and detritivores such as invertebrates, fungi, and microbes on the forest floor are critical to nutrient cycling. Vertebrate herbivores are relatively uncommon, with low-moderate mammalian diversity. Although epiphytes and lianas are present, plant life-form traits that are typical of tropical forests ([T1.1](/explore/groups/T1.1) and [T1.2](/explore/groups/T1.2)) such as buttress roots, compound leaves, monopodial growth, and cauliflory are uncommon or absent in warm-temperate rainforests. Some trees have ecophysiological tolerance of acid soils (e.g. through aluminium accumulation). Gap-phase dynamics are driven by individual tree-fall and lightning strikes, but many trees are shade-tolerant and recruit slowly in the absence of disturbance. Ground vegetation includes varied growth forms but few grasses.
 
[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
The environmental niche of these forests is defined by a modest overall water surplus with no distinct dry season, albeit moderate summer water deficits in some years. Mean annual rainfall is typically 1,200–2,500 mm, but topographic mesoclimates (e.g. sheltered gullies and orographic processes) sustain reliable moisture at some sites. Temperatures are mild with moderate seasonality and a growing season of 6–8 months, and mild frosts occur. Substrates may be acidic with high levels of Al and Fe that limit the uptake of nutrients. These forests may be embedded in fire-prone landscapes but are typically not flammable due to their moist microclimates .
 
# Distribution
 
Patchy warm temperate-subtropical distribution at 26–43° latitude, north or south of the Equator.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith, NA Brummitt, D Faber-Langendoen, RT Corlett and MS McGlone.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

**Map version**: T2.4.web.orig v2.0, updated 2020-07-29.

### Main references
* Corlett RT Hughes AC (2015) *Subtropical Forests*. **Handbook of Forest Ecology** pp. 46-55. Routledge.
* Grubb PJ, Bellingham PJ, Kohyama TS, Piper FS Valido A  (2013) *Disturbance regimes, gap-demanding trees and seed mass related to tree height in warm temperate rain forests worldwide*. **Biological Reviews** 88: 701–744. DOI: [10.1111/brv.12029](http://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12029)
* Mucina L  (2018) **Vegetation survey and classification of subtropical forests of southern Africa** Springer International Publishing. DOI: [10.1007/978-3-319-67831-3](http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67831-3)

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
