---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_7_1
content-id: T7.1
lang: en
title: T7.1 Annual croplands
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Croplands are intensively managed agricultural ecosystems maintained by supplementation of nutrients and water, sowing and harvesting, soil cultivation and control of non-target plants and animals (weeds and pests). They currently cover 11% of the world’s land surface. Some systems of management include domestic herbivores introduced on harvested stubble or in ‘fallow’ years. These are structurally simple, very low-diversity, high-productivity systems, dominated by one or few non-woody, shallow-rooted annual plant species such as grains (mostly C<sub>3</sub> grasses), vegetables, ‘cut flowers’, legumes, or fibre plants harvested annually by humans for commercial or subsistence production of food, materials, or ornamental displays.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
High-productivity croplands are maintained by the intensive anthropogenic supplementation of nutrients, water, and artificial disturbance regimes (e.g. annual cultivation), translocation (e.g. sowing), and harvesting of annual plants. These systems are typically dominated by one or few shallow-rooted short-lived plant species such as grains (mostly C<sub>3</sub> grasses), vegetables, ‘flowers’, legumes, or fibre species harvested annually by humans for the commercial or subsistence production of food, materials, or ornamental displays. Disequilibrium community structure and composition is maintained by translocations and/or managed reproduction of target species and usually by periodic application of herbicides and pesticides and/or culling to exclude competitors, predators, herbivores, and/or pathogens. Consequently, compared to antecedent ‘natural’ systems, croplands are structurally simple, have low functional, genetic, and taxonomic diversity and no local endemism. Subsistence croplands, including Swidden rotation systems, are typically more diverse than industrial croplands. Productivity is highly sensitive to variations in resource availability. Target biota are genetically manipulated by selective breeding or molecular engineering to promote rapid growth rates, efficient resource capture, enhanced resource allocation to production tissues, and tolerance to harsh environmental conditions, insect predators, and diseases. Typically, at least 40% of net primary productivity is appropriated by humans. Croplands may be rotated inter-annually with livestock pastures or fallow fields ([T7.2](/explore/groups/T7.2)) or may be integrated into mixed cropping-livestock systems. Target biota coexists with a cosmopolitan ruderal biota (e.g. weedy plants, mice, and starlings) that exploits production landscapes opportunistically through efficient dispersal, itinerant foraging, rapid establishment, high fecundity, and rapid population turnover. Native biota from adjoining non-anthropogenic systems may also interact with croplands. When actively managed systems are abandoned or managed less intensively, these non-target biota, especially non-woody plants, become dominant and may form a steady, self-maintaining state or a transitional phase to novel ecosystems.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
The high to moderate natural availability of water (from at least seasonally high rainfall) and nutrients (from fertile soils) is often supplemented by human inputs via irrigation, landscape drainage modifications (e.g. surface earthworks), and/or fertiliser application by humans. Intermittent flooding may occur where croplands replace palustrine wetlands. Temperatures are mild to warm, at least seasonally. These systems are typically associated with flat to moderate terrain accessible by machinery. Artificial disturbance regimes (e.g. annual ploughing) maintain soil turnover, aeration, nutrient release, and relatively low soil organic carbon content.
 
# Distribution
 
Tropical to temperate humid climatic zones or river flats in dry climates across south sub-Saharan and North Africa, Europe, Asia, southern Australia, Oceania, and the Americas.

Major occurrences of croplands were taken from the map of Habitat type 14.1 by Jung _et al._ (2020) based on the IUCN Habitats Classification Scheme v3.1 (IUCN 2012). We compared this to cropping areas in consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu _et al._, 2014) and found that maps of Jung _et al._ (2020) more closely matched the concept of [T7.1](/explore/groups/T7.1).

## Citation

DA Keith and R Harper. (2022). *T7.1 Annual croplands*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: T7.1.web.alt v2.0, updated 2020-11-08.

## References

### Main references
* Leff B, Ramankutty N, Foley JA  (2004) *Geographic distribution of major crops across the world*. **Global Biogeochemical Cycles** 18(1), GB1009.
* Ray DK., Foley JA  (2013) *Increasing global crop harvest frequency: recent trends and future directions*. **Environmental Research Letters** 8(4): 044041. DOI: [10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/044041](http://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/044041)

### Map references
* Martin Jung; Prabhat Raj Dahal; Stuart H. M. Butchart; Paul F. Donald;  Xavier De Lamo;  Myroslava Lesiv;  Valerie Kapos; Carlo Rondinini;  Piero Visconti (2020) *A global map of terrestrial habitat types*. **Zenodo** . DOI: [10.5281/zenodo.3666245](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3666245)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
