---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_6_3
content-id: T6.3
lang: en
title: T6.3 Polar tundra and deserts
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:42:39'
---

Polar tundra and deserts have continuous to sparse cover of cold-tolerant mosses, liverworts, lichens, grasses, low shrubs and other flowering plants. They occur primarily in the Arctic circle, but polar desert is found in dry coastal lowlands of Antarctica. Precipitation falls as snow, with seasonal snow cover limiting the growing season. Extreme cold temperatures and short growing seasons exclude trees, as well as vascular plants in the coldest and driest locations. Permafrost substrates accumulate peat through slow decomposition rates. Migratory birds feed in distant wetlands or open oceans, and contribute nutrients to the system through guano, as well as dispersing seeds and other organisms. Migratory or hibernating mammals include seals, and, in the north, polar bears, foxes and wolves.

# Ecological Traits
 
These low productivity autotrophic ecosystems are limited by winter dormancy during deep winter snow cover, extreme cold temperatures and frost during spring thaw, short growing seasons, desiccating winds, and seasonally low light intensity. Microbial decomposition rates are slow, promoting accumulation of peaty permafrost substrates in which only the surface horizon thaws seasonally. Vegetation is treeless and dominated by a largely continuous cover of cold-tolerant bryophytes, lichens, C<sub>3</sub> grasses, sedges, forbs, and dwarf and prostrate shrubs. Tundra around the world, is delimited by the physiological temperature limits of trees, which are excluded where the growing season (i.e. days >0.9°C) is less than 90-94 days duration, with mean temperatures less than 6.5°C across the growing season. In the coldest and/or driest locations, vascular plants are absent and productivity relies on bryophytes, lichens, cyanobacteria, and allochthonous energy sources such as guano. Aestivating insects (i.e. those that lay dormant in hot or dry seasons) dominate the invertebrate fauna. Vertebrate fauna is dominated by migratory birds, some of which travel seasonal routes exceeding several thousand kilometres. Many of these feed in distant wetlands or open oceans. These are critical mobile links that transfer nutrients and organic matter and disperse the propagules of other organisms, both externally on plumage or feet and endogenously. A few mammals in the Northern Hemisphere are hibernating residents or migratory herbivores. Pinnipeds occur in near-coast tundras and may be locally important marine subsidies of nutrients and energy. Predatory canids and polar bears are nomadic or have large home ranges. 

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Winters are very cold and dark and summers define short, cool growing seasons with long hours of low daylight. Precipitation falls as snow that persists through winter months. In most areas, there is an overall water surplus, occasionally with small summer deficit, but some areas are ice-free, extremely dry (annual precipitation <150mm p.a.) polar deserts with desiccating winds. Substrates are peaty or gravelly permafrost, which may partially thaw on the surface in summer, causing cryoturbation.
 
# Distribution
 
Primarily within the Arctic Circle and adjacent subarctic regions, with smaller occurrences on subantarctic islands and the Antarctic coast.

Areas corresponding to the tundra climatic zone according to the Köppen-Geiger classification system (Beck _et al._ 2018) were first identified. Additional areas were then selected in high latitudes corresponding with low annual solar radiation (values <1800 in Beckmann _et al._ 2014). A union of these maps was created at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution in geographic projection.

## References

**Citation**: DA Keith, F Essl, KR Young and CH Körner. (2020). *T6.3 Polar tundra and deserts*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. DOI:[10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en](https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en).  
**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

**Map version**: T6.3.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-11-08.

### Main references
* Crawford RMM  (2013) **Tundra-taiga biology** Ch 5. Oxford University Press, Oxford. ISBN [9780199559411](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/tundra-taiga-biology-9780199559411).
* Paulsen J, Körner C (2014) *A climate-based model to predict potential treeline position around the globe*. **Alpine Botany** 124, 1-12. DOI: [10.1007/s00035-014-0124-0](http://doi.org/10.1007/s00035-014-0124-0)

### Map references
* Beck, H., Zimmermann, N., McVicar, T. et al. (2018) *Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution*. **Sci Data** 5, 180214. DOI: [10.1038/sdata.2018.214](http://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.214)
* Beckmann M., Václavík T., Manceur A.M., Šprtová L., von Wehrden H., Welk E., Cord A.F.  (2014) *glUV: A global UV-B radiation dataset for macroecological studies*. **Methods in Ecology and Evolution** 5: 372–383.. DOI: [10.1111/2041-210X.12168](http://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12168)
