---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/sm_1_2
content-id: SM1.2
lang: en
title: SM1.2 Anchialine pools
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Anchialine pools are brackish surface water bodies that have a subterranean connection to the sea. They are associated with carbonate substrates and lava flows on the coast and have a stronger terrestrial influence than other subterranean systems. Exposure to the surface enables algal primary producers to inhabit the water column and the benthos. Diversity and productivity of these aquatic ecosystems increases with age and connectivity to the sea. Some anchialine pools are highly insular, with molluscs and crustacean species found nowhere else.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Anchialine pools, like anchialine caves ([SM1.1](/explore/groups/SM1.1)), are tidally influenced bodies of brackish water with subterranean connections to the sea and groundwater, but with significant or full exposure to open air and sunlight. They have no surface connection to the ocean or freshwater ecosystems. Younger anchialine pools are exposed to abundant sunlight, characterized by relatively low productivity, and tend to support only benthic microalgae, cyanobacteria, and primary consumers. Older pools with more established biological communities have higher productivity with a wider range of autotrophs, including macroalgae, aquatic monocots, established riparian and canopy vegetation, and primary and secondary consumers. High productivity is attributed to a combination of sunlight exposure, rugose substrates, and relatively high natural concentrations of inorganic nutrients from groundwater. Anchialine pools may support complex benthic microbial communities, primary consumers, filter-feeders, detritivores, scavengers and secondary consumers. These consumers are primarily molluscs and crustaceans, several of which are anchialine obligates. Due to connections with deeper hypogeal habitats, obligate species may display physical and physiological traits similar to anchialine cave species. However, larger predatory fish and birds also utilize anchialine pools for food and habitat. Anchialine pools are ecologically dynamic systems due to their openness, connections with surrounding terrestrial habitats and subterranean hydrologic connections. Consequently, they are inherently sensitive to ecological phase shifts throughout their relatively ephemeral existence, with senescence initiating in as little as 100 years. However, new anchialine pools may form within a few months after basaltic lava flows.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Anchialine pools form from subterranean mixing of seawater and groundwater, primarily through porous basalt or limestone substrates, and more rarely other lithic substrates. Tidal influences can drive large fluctuations in water level and salinity on a daily cycle, but are typically dampened with increased distance from the ocean. Sunlight, UV exposure and other environmental characteristics vary within anchialine pools and haloclines are common. The pools can also be connected to anchialine cave systems ([SM1.1](/explore/groups/SM1.1)) through tension fissures in basalt flows, and collapsed openings in lava tubes.
 
# Distribution
 
Scattered worldwide, mostly in the northern hemisphere. Many well- known examples occur in Hawaii, Palau and Indonesia, volcanic cracks or grietas in the Galapagos Islands, and open-air entrance pools of anchialine caves (e.g. cenotes in Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula and blue holes in the Bahamas).

Indicative distributions of Anchialine caves and pools were based on mapped areas of carbonate rock outcrop (Williams & Ting Fong 2016) and lava flows intersecting the coast, which were aggregated within a template of 1-degree grid cells.

## References

**Citation**: TS Sakihara, M Lamson, B Seidel, DM Sedar, S Santos, J Havird, TM Iliffe and DA Keith. (2020). *SM1.2 Anchialine pools*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. DOI:[10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en](https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: SM1.2.web.grid v3.0, updated 2020-11-08.

### Main references
* Becking LE, Renema W, Santodomingo NK, Hoeksema BW, Tuti Y, de Voogd NJ (2011) *Recently discovered landlocked basins in Indonesia reveal high habitat diversity in anchialine systems*. **Hydrobiologia** 677, 89-105.
* Por FD (1985) *Anchialine pools—comparative hydrobiology*. **Hypersaline ecosystems**  pp. 136-144. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

### Map references
* Williams P, Ting Fong Y  (2016) **World map of carbonate rock outcrops v3.0** The University of Auckland, Auckland. [Webpage](https://www.fos.auckland.ac.nz/our_research/karst/).
