---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/sf_1_1
content-id: SF1.1
lang: en
title: SF1.1 Underground streams and pools
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-17 15:35:00'
---

These dark aquatic systems buried below ground have varied levels of connectivity to surface waters, which influence their traits and processes profoundly. Microbial mats composed of bacteria and aquatic fungi on submerged rock surfaces are major food sources for protozoans and invertebrates, especially in systems that are isolated from surface waters. Larger water bodies support predatory fish. When connectivity is strong, inflow brings a supply of nutrients and organic matter, as well as itinerant biota.

# Ecological Traits
 
Subterranean streams, pools, and aquatic voids (flooded caves) are low-productivity systems devoid of light. The taxonomic and functional diversity of these water bodies is low, but they may host local endemics, depending on connectivity with surface waters and between cave systems. The truncated trophic network is entirely heterotrophic, with no photosynthetic primary producers or herbivores. Detritivores and their predators are dominant, although a few specialist predators may be associated with resource-rich hotspots. Microbial mats composed of bacteria and aquatic fungi covering submerged rock surfaces are major food sources for protozoans and invertebrates. Other biota include planktonic bacteria, crustaceans, annelids, molluscs, arachnids, and fish in larger voids. Chemoautotrophic proteobacteria are locally abundant in sulphur-rich waters fed by springs but not widespread. Obligate denizens of subterranean waters complete their life cycles entirely below ground and derive from relatively few evolutionary lineages. These make up a variable portion of the biota, depending on connectivity to surface waters. Most species are generalist detritivores coexisting under weak competitive interactions. Some are also opportunistic predators, reflecting selection pressures of food scarcity. Distinctive traits include the absence of eyes and pigmentation, long lifespans, slow metabolism and growth rates, and low fecundity. Less-specialised biota include taxa that spend part of their life cycles below ground and part above, as well as temporary below-ground inhabitants. Transient vertebrates occur only in waters of larger subterranean voids that are well connected to surface streams with abundant food.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Most caves form from chemical weathering of soluble rocks such as limestone or dolomite, and others include lava tunnels. Cave waters are devoid of light, typically low in dissolved oxygen nutrients, and food, and exhibit low variability in temperature. Water chemistry reflects substrate properties (e.g. high Calcium levels in limestone voids). Resource supply and biotic dispersal depend on connectivity with surface waters, flow velocity and turbulence. In the absence of light, surface-connected streams are major allochthonous sources of energy and nutrients. Disconnected systems are the most biologically insular and oligotrophic, and may also be limited by nutrient imbalance. These features promote insular evolution in stable conditions.
 
# Distribution
 
Scattered worldwide, mostly in the Northern Hemisphere in limestone and more rarely in basalt flows and other lithic substrates.

Distributions of Underground streams and pools were based on mapped area of carbonate rock outcrop (Williams & Ting Fong 2016). This. provides an upper limit on the area of exposed karst terrain, as not all carbonate rocks are karstified. Lava tubes and other rocks that may contain these ecosystem functional groups are not shown on this indicative map, but are less extensive than those in carbonate rock.

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith and GC Hose.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-17.

**Map version**: SF1.1.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-05 by DA Keith and JR Ferrer-Paris.

### Main references
* Gibert J, Deharveng L  (2002) *Subterranean ecosystems: a truncated functional biodiversity*. **BioScience** 52, 473-481. DOI: [10.1641/0006-3568(2002)052[0473:seatfb]2.0.co;2](http://doi.org/10.1641/0006-3568(2002)052[0473:seatfb]2.0.co;2)

### Map references
* Williams P, Ting Fong Y  (2016) **World map of carbonate rock outcrops v3.0** The University of Auckland, Auckland. [Webpage](https://www.fos.auckland.ac.nz/our_research/karst/).
