---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/m_1_3
content-id: M1.3
lang: en
title: M1.3 Photic coral reefs
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-27 21:08:56'
---

These slow growing biogenic structures are formed by the calcium carbonate skeletons of certain coral species that depend on symbiotic relationships with algae. They occur in warm, shallow, low-nutrient waters and provide complex three-dimensional habitat for a highly diverse community across all trophic levels, from algae to sharks, along with other characteristic sessile organisms like coralline algae and sponges. Niche habitats produce specialist behaviours and diets, like the symbiotic relationship between clown fish and anemones. Storms and marine heat waves drive cycles of reef destruction and renewal.

# Ecological Traits
 
Coral reefs are biogenic structures that have been built up and continue to grow over decadal timescales as a result of the accumulation of calcium carbonate laid down by hermatypic (scleractinian) corals and other organisms. Reef-building corals are mixotrophic colonies of coral polyps in endosymbiotic relationships with photosynthesizing zooxanthellae that assimilate solar energy and nutrients, providing almost all of the metabolic requirements for their host. The corals develop skeletons by extracting dissolved carbonate from seawater and depositing it as aragonite crystals. Corals reproduce asexually, enabling the growth of colonial structures. They also reproduce sexually, with mostly synchronous spawning related to annual lunar cues. Other sessile organisms including sponges, soft corals, gorgonians, coralline algae, and other algae add to the diversity and structural complexity of coral reef ecosystems. The complex three-dimensional structure provides a high diversity of habitat niches and resources that support a highly diverse and locally endemic marine biota, including crustaceans, polychaetes, holothurians, echinoderms, and other groups, with one-quarter of marine life estimated to depend on reefs for food and/or shelter. Diversity is high at all taxonomic levels relative to all other ecosystems. The trophic network is highly complex, with functional diversity represented on the benthos and in the water column by primary producers, herbivores, detritivores, suspension-feeders, and multiple interacting levels of predators. Coral diseases also play a role in reef dynamics. The vertebrate biota includes fish, snakes, turtles, and mammals. The fish fauna is highly diverse, with herbivores and piscivores displaying a wide diversity of generalist and specialist diets (including parrot fish that consume corals), feeding strategies, schooling and solitary behaviours, and reproductive strategies. The largest vertebrates include marine turtles and sharks. 

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Coral reefs are limited to warm, shallow (rarely >60 m depth), clear, relatively nutrient-poor, open coastal waters, where salinity is 3.0–3.8% and sea temperatures vary (17–34°C). Cooler temperatures are insufficient to support coral growth, while warmer temperatures cause coral symbiosis to break down (i.e. bleaching). Reef geomorphology varies from atolls, barrier reefs, fringing reefs and lagoons to patch reefs depending upon hydrological and geological conditions. Reef structure and composition vary with depth gradients such as  light intensity and turbulence, exposure gradients, such as exposure itself and sedimentation. Storm regimes and marine heat waves (thermal anomalies) drive cycles of reef destruction and renewal.
 
# Distribution
 
Tropical and subtropical waters on continental and island shelves, mostly within latitudes of 30°N and 30°S.

Indicative maps of Photic coral reefs were obtained from Institute for Marine Remote Sensing _et al._ (2011). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## References

**Contributors**: BA Polidoro, S Rossi, CRC Sheppard, SN Porter and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-27.

**Map version**: M1.3.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-05.

### Main references
* Sheppard C, Davy S, Pilling G, Graham N  (2018) **The biology of coral reefs. ** 2nd Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

### Map references
* Institute for Marine Remote Sensing, University of South Florida  (2011) *Global Coral Reefs composite dataset*. **Reefs at Risk Revisited project**  Compiled from multiple sources, incorporating products from the Millennium Coral Reef Mapping Project prepared by IMaRS/USF and IRD..
