---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_2_5
content-id: F2.5
lang: en
title: F2.5 Ephemeral freshwater lakes
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-24 11:27:56'
---

These are shallow lakes that are mostly dry, and then fill for weeks or months, before drying again. During dry periods, many animals or plants survive as eggs, seeds or other dormant forms, while other species disperse. Floods, bring water from surrounding catchments and floodplains with organic matter, nutrients and fine sediments, and trigger movement of birds and mammals. Floods activate simple foodwebs, comprising abundant algae, zooplankton, waterbugs and crustaceans, which have rapid life-cycles able to exploit windows of productivity. This produces food for frogs and visiting waterbirds.

# Ecological Traits
 
Shallow ephemeral freshwater bodies are also known as depressions, playas, clay pans, or pans. Long periods of low productivity during dry phases are punctuated by episodes of high production after filling. Trophic structure is relatively simple with mostly benthic, filamentous, and planktonic algae, detritivorous and predatory zooplankton (e.g. rotifers and Daphnia), crustaceans, insects, and in some lakes, molluscs. The often high invertebrate biomass provides food for amphibians and itinerant waterbirds. Terrestrial mammals use the lakes to drink and bathe and may transfer nutrients, organic matter, and ’hitch-hiking’ biota. Diversity may be high in boom phases but there are only a few local endemics (e.g. narrow-ranged charophytes). Specialised and opportunistic biota exploit boom-bust resource availability through life-cycle traits that confer tolerance to desiccation (e.g. desiccation-resistant eggs in crustaceans) and/or enable rapid hatching, development, breeding, and recruitment when water arrives. Much of the biota (e.g. opportunistic insects) have widely dispersing adult phases enabling rapid colonisation and re-colonisation. Filling events initiate succession with spikes of primary production, allowing short temporal windows for consumers to grow and reproduce, and for itinerant predators to aggregate. Drying initiates senescence, dispersal, and dormancy until the next filling event.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Arid climates have highly variable hydrology. Episodic inundation after rain is relatively short (days to months) due to high evaporation rates and infiltration. Drainage systems are closed or nearly so, with channels or sheet inflow from flat, sparsely vegetated catchments. Inflows bring allochthonous organic matter and nutrients and are typically turbid with fine particles. Clay-textured lake bottoms hold water by limiting percolation but may include sand particles. Bottom sediments release nutrients rapidly after filling. Lakes are shallow, flat-bottomed and polymicitic when filled with small volumes, so light and oxygen are generally not limiting. Persistent turbidity may limit light but oxygen production by macrophytes and flocculation (i.e. clumping) from increasing salinity during drying reduce turbidity over time. Shallow depth promotes high daytime water temperatures (when filling in summer) and high diurnal temperature variability.
 
# Distribution
 
Semi-arid and arid regions at mid-latitudes of the Americas, Africa, Asia, and Australia. 

Location of natural ephemeral freshwater lakes was taken from global lake databases (Lehner and Döll 2004; types 1 an 3 from Messager _et al._ 2016), excluding those from endorheic basins cf. [F2.7](/explore/groups/F2.7) (Linke _et al._ 2019), and intersected with estimates of ephemeral surface water (classes 9 and 10 from Pekel _et al._ 2016). Occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.

## References

**Contributors**: DJ Roux, R Mac Nally, RT Kingsford, JT Hollibaugh and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-24.

**Map version**: F2.5.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-10-05.

### Main references
* Hancock MA, Timms BV  (2002) *Ecology of four turbid clay pans during a filling-drying cycle in the Paroo, semi-arid Australia*. **Hydrobiologia** 479: 95-107.
* Meintjes S  (1996) *Seasonal changes in the invertebrate community of small shallow ephemeral pans at Bain's Vlei, South Africa*. **Hydrobiologia** 317: 51-64.
* Williams WD  (2000) *Biodiversity in temporary wetlands of dryland regions*. **Internationale Vereinigung für theoretische und angewandte Limnologie: Verhandlungen** 27: 141-144.

### Map references
* Lehner, B. and Döll, P.  (2004) *Development and validation of a global database of lakes, reservoirs and wetlands*. **Journal of Hydrology** 296/1-4: 1-22. [Data-set](https://www.worldwildlife.org/pages/global-lakes-and-wetlands-database). DOI: [10.1016/j.jhydrol.2004.03.028](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2004.03.028)
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M.  (2019) *Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution*. **Scientific Data** 6: 283. DOI: [10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O.  (2016) *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications** 13603. DOI: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
* Pekel JF, Cottam A, Gorelick N, Belward AS (2016) *High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes*. **Nature** 540, 418-422. DOI: [10.1038/nature20584](http://doi.org/10.1038/nature20584)
