---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_1_4
content-id: F1.4
lang: en
title: F1.4 Seasonal upland streams
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-24 11:35:55'
---

Seasonal rainfall patterns in large parts of the tropics and temperate regions generate flows that are hugely variable in narrow and steep upland streams. Globally, these streams account for the greatest stream length of any flowing ecosystem. During the dry season, flows in some streams are reduced to very levels, while in others flow ceases altogether and water persists only in isolated stagnant pools. Algae and leaf fall support moderate productivity, with seasonal floods sending organic matter downstream. The diversity of organisms fluctuates seasonally, with many localised (endemic) species, and specialised adaptations that enable animals to survive both flooding and dry conditions.

# Ecological Traits
 
Upland streams (orders 1-4) with highly  seasonal flows generally have low to moderate productivity and a simpler trophic structure than lowland rivers. They tend to be shallow, hence benthic algae are major contributors to in-stream food webs and productivity, but riparian zones and catchments both contribute allochthonous energy and organic carbon through leaf fall, which may include an annual deciduous component. Primary production also varies with light availability and flow. Taxonomic diversity varies between streams, but can be lower than permanent streams and relatively high in endemism. Traits that enable biota to persist in narrow and shallow channels with large seasonal variations in flow velocity, episodes of torrential flow, and seasonal desiccation include small body sizes (especially in resident fish), dormant life phases and/or burrowing (crustaceans), omnivorous diets and high dispersal ability, including seasonal migration. Compared to lowland rivers, the trophic structure has a higher representation of algal and omnivorous feeders and low numbers of larger predators. Birds show specialist feeding strategies (e.g. dippers). Diversity and abundance of invertebrates and their predators (e.g. birds) fluctuate in response to seasonal flood regimes.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Flow and flood regimes in these rivers are highly variable between marked wet and dry seasons, with associated changes in water quality as solute concentration varies with volume. They may be perennial, with flows much-reduced in the dry season, or seasonally intermittent with flows ceasing and water persisting in isolated stagnant pools. Channels are narrow with steep to moderate gradients, seasonally high velocity and sometimes large volumes of water, producing overbank flows. This results in considerable turbulence, turbidity, and erosion during the wet season and coarse substrates (cobbles and boulders). Seasonal floods are critical to allochtonous subsidies and downstream exports of organic matter and nutrients.
 
# Distribution
 
Elevated regions in seasonal tropical, subtropical and temperate climates worldwide. 

Freshwater ecoregions (Abell _et al._ 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within the selected ecoregions, major occurrences were mapped using 1<sup>st</sup>-4th order streams (3km buffer) taken from the RiverATLAS (v1.0) database (Linke _et al._ 2019). The remaining areas of selected ecoregions were mapped as minor occurrences.

## References

**Citation**: RT Kingsford, B Robson, PS Giller, AH Arthington, M Kelly-Quinn and DA Keith. (2020). 'F1.4 Seasonal upland streams'. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-24.

**Map version**: F1.4.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-11-08.

### Main references
* Datry T, Bonada N, Boulton A (2017) **Intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams: ecology and management** (Academic Press: Burlington).
* Davies PM, Bunn SE, Hamilton SK  (2008) *Primary production in tropical streams and rivers*. **Tropical stream ecology** (Ed. D Dudgeon), pp. 23–42. Academic Press, London. DOI: [10.1016/b978-012088449-0.50004-2](http://doi.org/10.1016/b978-012088449-0.50004-2)
* de Carvalho RA., Tejerina-Garro FL.  (2018) *Headwater-river gradient: trait-based approaches show functional dissimilarities among tropical fish assemblages.*. **Marine and Freshwater Research**  69: 574-584. DOI: [10.1071/mf17149](http://doi.org/10.1071/mf17149)
* Jardine RD, Bond NR, Burford MA, Kennard MJ, Ward DP, Bayliss P, Davies PM, Douglas MM, Hamilton SK, Melack JM, Naiman RJ, Pett NE, Pusey BJ, Warfe DM, Bunn SE (2015) *Does flood rhythm drive ecosystem responses in tropical riverscapes?*. **Ecology** 96, 684–692 . DOI: [10.1890/14-0991.1](http://doi.org/10.1890/14-0991.1)

### Map references
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P  (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*. **BioScience** 58: 403–414. [Data-set](http://www.feow.org). DOI: [10.1641/B580507](http://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Linke, S., Lehner, B., Ouellet Dallaire, C., Ariwi, J., Grill, G., Anand, M., Beames, P., Burchard-Levine, V., Maxwell, S., Moidu, H., Tan, F., Thieme, M.  (2019) *Global hydro-environmental sub-basin and river reach characteristics at high spatial resolution*. **Scientific Data** 6: 283. DOI: [10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0300-6)
