---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/tf_1_3
content-id: TF1.3
lang: en
title: TF1.3 Permanent marshes
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 17:45:58'
---

Permanent marshes occur throughout tropical and temperate regions of the world in flat areas with stable water levels close to the surface. They are essentially treeless, with extensive reedbeds and aquatic grasses, interspersed with patches of open water. Food webs are strongly influenced by highly productive algae and plants, providing food for large numbers of invertebrates, waterbirds, reptiles, and mammals.

# Ecological Traits
 
These shallow, permanently inundated freshwater wetlands lack woody vegetation but are dominated instead by emergent macrophytes growing in extensive, often monospecific groves of rhizomatous grasses, sedges, rushes, or reeds in mosaics with patches of open water. These plants, together with phytoplankton, algal mats, epiphytes, floating, and amphibious herbs, sustain high primary productivity and strong bottom-up regulation. Although most of the energy comes from these functionally diverse autotrophs, inflow and seepage from catchments may contribute allochthonous energy and nutrients. Plant traits including aerenchymatous stems and leaf tissues (e.g with air spaces) enable oxygen transport to roots and rhizomes and into the substrate. Invertebrate and microbial detritivores and decomposers inhabit the water column and substrate. Air-breathing invertebrates are more common than gill-breathers, due to low dissolved oxygen. The activity of microbial decomposers is also limited by low oxygen levels and organic deposition continually exceeds decomposition. Their aquatic predators include invertebrates, turtles, snakes and sometimes small fish. The emergent vegetation supports a complex trophic web including insects with winged adult phases, waterbirds, reptiles, and mammals, which feed in the vegetation and also use it for nesting (e.g herons, muskrat, and alligators). Waterbirds include herbivores, detritivores, and predators. Many plants and animals disperse widely beyond the marsh through the air, water and zoochory (e.g birds, mammals). Reproduction and recruitment coincide with resource availability and may be cued to floods. Most macrophytes spread vegetatively with long rhizomes but also produce an abundance of wind- and water-dispersed seeds.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
These systems occur in several geomorphic settings including lake shores, groundwater seeps, river floodplains, and deltas, always in low-energy depositional environments. Shallow but perennial inundation and low variability are maintained by frequent floods and lake waters, sometimes independently of local climate. This sustains high levels of water and nutrients but also generates substrate anoxia. Substrates are typically organic. Their texture varies, but silt and clay substrates are associated with high levels of P and N. Salinity is low but may be transitional where wetlands connect with brackish lagoons ([FM1.2](/explore/groups/FM1.2), [FM1.3](/explore/groups/FM1.3)). Surface fires may burn vegetation in some permanent marshes, but rarely burn the saturated substrate, and are less pervasive drivers of these ecosystems than seasonal floodplain marshes ([TF1.4](/explore/groups/TF1.4)).
 
# Distribution
 
Scattered throughout the tropical and temperate regions worldwide.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein et al. 2017), global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, and experts.

## References

**Contributors**: RT Kingsford and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

### Main references
* Grace JB, Wetzel RG  (1981) *Habitat partitioning and competitive displacement in cattails (Typha): experimental field studies*. **The American Naturalist** 118:463-474. DOI: [10.1086/283841](http://doi.org/10.1086/283841)

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set available on-line](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
