---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_6_2
content-id: T6.2
lang: en
title: 'T6.2 Polar/alpine cliffs, screes, outcrops and lava flows'
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-15 12:07:35'
---

Polar-alpine rocky outcrops occur in permanently ice-free areas of polar regions and high mountains. Productivity and biomass are limited by extreme cold, rocky substrate and strong winds. Algae, lichens, mosses and bacteria support a short and simple foodweb in the summer months, with cold-tolerant invertebrates such as tardigrades. Some rocky sites provide nesting sites for birds in summer. Substrate weathering and guano are major nutrient inputs. These systems are periodically disturbed as accumulated snow and ice collapses down steep slopes.

# Ecological Traits
 
Low biomass systems with very low productivity constrained by extreme cold, desiccating winds, skeletal substrates, periodic mass movement, and, in polar regions, by seasonally low light intensity. The dominant lifeforms are freeze-tolerant crustose lichens, mosses, and algae that also tolerate periodic desiccation, invertebrates such as tardigrades, nematodes, and mites, micro-organisms including bacteria and protozoa, and nesting birds that forage primarily in other (mostly marine) ecosystems. Diversity and endemism are low, likely due to intense selection pressures and wide dispersal. Trophic networks are simple and truncated. Physiological traits such as cold-adapted enzymes and cold-shock proteins enable metabolic activity, which is restricted to summer months when temperatures are close to or above zero. Nutrient input occurs primarily through substrate weathering supplemented by guano, which along with cyanobacteria is a major source of N. Mass movement of snow and rock, with accumulation of snow and ice during the intervals between collapse events, promotes disequilibrium ecosystem dynamics.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Extremely cold winters with wind-chill that may reduce temperatures below −80°C in Antarctica. In contrast, insolation and heat absorption on rocky substrates may increase summer temperatures well above 0°C. Together with the impermeable substrate and intermittently high winds, exposure to summer insolation may produce periods of extreme water deficit punctuated by saturated conditions associated with meltwater and seepage. Periodic burial by snow reduces light availability, while mass movement through landslides, avalanches, or volcanic eruptions maintain substrate instability and destroy biomass, limiting the persistence of biota.
 
# Distribution
 
Permanently ice-free areas of Antarctica, Greenland, the Arctic Circle, and high mountains in the western Americas, central Asia, Europe, Africa, and New Zealand.

Known locations of prominent ice-free rock in glacial and alpine environments were selected from global geographical gazeteers (GeoNames 2020), glacier inventories (Raup et al 2007; GLIMS and NSIDC 2005-2018) and the Antarctic Land Cover map for 2000 (Hui _et al._ 2017). Further areas with mixed occurrence of barren and snow/ice cover were identified from the Circumpolar Arctic Vegetation Map (Raynolds _et al._ 2019), the USGS EROS LandCover GLCCDB, version 2 (Loveland _et al._ 2000) and a 1km consensus land-cover map (Tuanmu _et al._ 2014). A composite map was created at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution in geographic projection, occurrences were then aggregated to half degree cells.  Cells containing at least one known location were designated as major occurrences, while those mapped as mixed barren and snow/ice cover were designated as minor occurrences if snow/ice covered at least 2.5% of the cell area.

## References

**Citation**: DA Keith, KR Young and A Terauds. (2020). 'T6.2 Polar/alpine cliffs, screes, outcrops and lava flows'. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-15.

**Map version**: T6.2.web.alt v2.0, updated 2020-10-20.

### Main references
* Chown SL, Clarke A, Fraser CI, Cary SC, Moon KL, McGeoch MA  (2015) *The changing form of Antarctic Biodiversity*. **Nature** 522: 431-438.
* Convey P, Stevens PI  (2007) *Antarctic Biodiversity*. **Science** 317: 1877-1878.

### Map references
* GeoNames  (2020) **The GeoNames geographical database** [https://www.geonames.org] Accessed in Feb 2020.
* GLIMS and NSIDC  (2005-2018) *Global Land Ice Measurements from Space glacier database*. **NA** Compiled and made available by the international GLIMS community and the National Snow and Ice Data Center, Boulder CO, U.S.A.  . DOI: [10.7265/N5V98602](http://doi.org/10.7265/N5V98602)
* Hui, F., J. Kang, Y. Liu, X. Cheng, P. Gong, F. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Ye, and Z. Guo (2017) *AntarcticaLC2000: The new Antarctic land cover database for the year 2000*. **SCIENCE CHINA Earth Sciences** 60: 686-696. DOI: [10.1007/s11430-016-0029-2](http://doi.org/10.1007/s11430-016-0029-2)
*  Loveland, T.R., Reed, B.C., Brown, J.F., Ohlen, D.O., Zhu, J, Yang, L., and Merchant, J.W. (2000) *Development of a Global Land Cover Characteristics Database and IGBP DISCover from 1-km AVHRR Data*. **International Journal of Remote Sensing** v. 21, no. 6/7, p. 1303-1330.
* Martha K. Raynolds, Donald A. Walker, Andrew Balser, Christian Bay, Mitch Campbell, Mikhail M. Cherosov, Fred J.A. Daniëls, Pernille Bronken Eidesen, Ksenia A. Ermokhina, Gerald V. Frost, Birgit Jedrzejek, M. Torre Jorgenson, Blair E. Kennedy, Sergei S. Kholod, Igor A. Lavrinenko, Olga V. Lavrinenko, Borgþór Magnússon, Nadezhda V. Matveyeva, Sigmar Metúsalemsson, Lennart Nilsen, Ian Olthof, Igor N. Pospelov, Elena B. Pospelova, Darren Pouliot, Vladimir Razzhivin, Gabriela Schaepman-Strub, Jozef Šibík, Mikhail Yu. Telyatnikov, Elena Troeva  (2019) *A raster version of the Circumpolar Arctic Vegetation Map (CAVM)*. **Remote Sensing of Environment** 232: 111297. DOI: [10.1016/j.rse.2019.111297](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.111297)
* Raup, B.H.; A. Racoviteanu; S.J.S. Khalsa; C. Helm; R. Armstrong; Y. Arnaud  (2007) *The GLIMS Geospatial Glacier Database: a New Tool for Studying Glacier Change*. **Global and Planetary Change** 56:101--110. DOI: [10.1016/j.gloplacha.2006.07.018](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2006.07.018)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
