---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_1_1
content-id: T1.1
lang: en
title: T1.1 Tropical/Subtropical lowland rainforests
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-15 11:31:21'
---

A huge diversity of species occupy niches within a complex vertically-layered structure of plant forms. High productivity is fuelled by rapid-growing plants including buttressed trees, bamboos, epiphytes, lianas and ferns. Forest canopies sustain moist soils and abundant leaf litter decomposed by fungi and bacteria. High diversity of invertebrates at all levels of the forest supports diverse vertebrate life forms, particularly mammals and birds, which play critical roles in plant dispersal and pollination. Conditions near the equator are stable and humid year-round (up to 6000 mm rain per annum), but become more seasonal with mild winter frosts in the subtropics.

# Ecological Traits
 
These closed-canopy forests are renowned for their complex structure and high primary productivity, which support high functional and taxonomic diversity. At subtropical latitudes they transition to warm temperate forests ([T2.4](/explore/groups/T2.4)). Bottom-up regulatory processes are fuelled by large autochthonous energy sources that support very high primary productivity, biomass and LAI. The structurally complex, multi-layered, evergreen tree canopy has a large range of leaf sizes (typically macrophyll-notophyll) and high SLA, reflecting rapid growth and turnover. Diverse plant life forms include buttressed trees, bamboos (sometimes abundant), epiphytes, lianas and ferns, but grasses and hydrophytes are absent or rare. Trophic networks are complex and vertically stratified with low exclusivity and diverse representation of herbivorous, frugivorous, and carnivorous vertebrates. Tree canopies support a vast diversity of invertebrate herbivores and their predators. Mammals and birds play critical roles in plant diaspore dispersal and pollination. Growth and reproductive phenology may be seasonal or unseasonal, and reproductive masting is common in trees and regulates diaspore predation. Fungal, microbial, and diverse invertebrate decomposers and detritivores dominate the forest floor and the subsoil. Diversity is high across taxa, especially at the upper taxonomic levels of trees, vertebrates, fungi, and invertebrate fauna. Neutral processes, as well as micro-niche partitioning, may have a role in sustaining high diversity, but evidence is limited. Many plants are in the shade, forming seedling banks that exploit gap-phase dynamics initiated by individual tree-fall or stand-level canopy disruption by tropical storms in near coastal forests. Seed banks regulated by dormancy are uncommon. Many trees exhibit leaf form plasticity enabling photosynthetic function in deep shade, dappled light or full sun, even on a single individual. Some species germinate on tree trunks, gaining quicker access to canopy light, while roots absorb microclimatic moisture until they reach the soil.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Precipitation exceeds evapotranspiration with low intra- and inter-annual variability, creating a reliable year-round surplus, while closed tree canopies maintain humid microclimate and shade. Temperatures are warm with low-moderate diurnal and seasonal variation (mean winter minima rarely <10°C except in subtropical transitional zones). Soils are moist but not regularly inundated or peaty (see [TF1.1](/explore/groups/TF1.1)). Most nutrient capital is sequestered in vegetation or cycled through the dynamic litter layer, critical for retaining nutrients that would otherwise be leached or lost to runoff. In some coastal regions outside equatorial latitudes (mostly >10° and excluding extensive forests in continental America and Africa), decadal regimes of tropical storms drive cycles of canopy destruction and renewal.
 
# Distribution
 
Humid tropical and subtropical regions in Central and West Africa, Southeast Asia, Oceania, northeast Australia, Central and tropical South America and the Caribbean. 

Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu _et al._ 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith, KR Young and RT Corlett.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-15.

**Map version**: T1.1.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-07-31.

### Main references
* Ashton PS, Seidler R (2014) **On the forests of tropical Asia: lest the memory fade** Kew Publishing: Kew.
* Corlett RT, Primack RB  (2011) **Tropical Rain Forests: An ecological and biogeographical comparison.** Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN [978-1-444-39229-6]( https://www.wiley.com/en-us/9781444392296).

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
