---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_6_5
content-id: T6.5
lang: en
title: T6.5 Tropical alpine grasslands and herbfields
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:50:19'
---

Tropical alpine grasslands and herbfields are limited to a few mountainous areas of Africa, the Americas and southeast Asia. Productivity is low, limited by dry conditions, rocky substrate and nightly cold, but is not strongly seasonal. Snow and fog are common. Typical flora includes mosses, lichens, and flowering plants including distinctive megaherbs and low shrubs. Plant species have adaptations for cold dry conditions, such as tiny leaves, cushion and rosette growth forms and slow growth. Plant composition is affected by competition and facilitation between species, as well as grazing and occasional fires. Simple foodwebs include invertebrates, small mammals and reptiles, along with visiting predators and occasional herbivores from lowland savannas.

# Ecological Traits
 
Treeless mountain systems dominated by an open to dense cover of cold-tolerant C<sub>3</sub> perennial tussock grasses, herbs, small shrubs, and distinctive arborescent rosette or cushion growth forms. Lichens and bryophytes are also common. Productivity is low, dependent on autochthonous energy, and limited by cold temperatures, diurnal freeze-thaw cycles, and desiccating conditions, but not by a short growing season (as in [T6.4](/explore/groups/T6.4)). Elfin forms of tropical montane forests ([T1.3](/explore/groups/T1.3)) occupy sheltered gullies and lower elevations. Diversity is low to moderate but endemism is high among some taxa, reflecting steep elevational gradients, microhabitat heterogeneity, and topographic insularity, which restricts dispersal. Solifluction (i.e. the slow flow of saturated soil downslope) restricts seedling establishment to stable microsites. Plants have traits to protect buds, leaves, and reproductive tissues from diurnal cold and transient desiccation stress, including ramulose (i.e. many-branched), cushion, and rosette growth forms, insulation from marcescent (i.e. dead) leaves or pectin fluids, diminutive leaf sizes, leaf pubescence, water storage in stem-pith, and vegetative propagation. Most plants are long-lived and some rosette forms are semelparous. Cuticle and epidermal layers reduce UV-B transmission to photosynthetic tissues. Plant coexistence is mediated by competition, facilitation, herbivory (vertebrate and invertebrate), and fire regimes. Simple trophic networks include itinerant large herbivores and predators from adjacent lowland savannas as well as resident reptiles, small mammals, and macro-invertebrates.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Cold nights (as low as −10°C) and mild days (up to 15°C) produce low mean temperatures and diurnal freeze-thaw cycles, but seasonal temperature range is small and freezing temperatures are short-lived. Cloud cover and precipitation are unseasonal in equatorial latitudes or seasonal in the monsoonal tropics. Strong orographic effects result in an overall precipitation surplus and snow and fog are common, but desiccating conditions may occur during intervals between precipitation events, with morning insolation also increasing moisture stress when roots are cold. Exposure to UV-B radiation is very high. Substrates are typically rocky and shallow (with low moisture retention capacity) and exposed to solifluction. Micro-topographic heterogeneity influences fine-scale spatial variation in moisture availability. Steep slopes are subjected to periodic mass movements, which destroy surface vegetation. Low-intensity fires may be ignited by lightning or spread upslope from lowland savannas, but these occur infrequently at multi-decadal intervals.
 
# Distribution
 
Restricted mountainous areas of tropical Central and South America, East and West Africa, and Southeast Asia.

Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu _et al._ 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.

## References

**Citation**: DA Keith and A Etter. (2020). 'T6.5 Tropical alpine grasslands and herbfields'. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

**Map version**: T6.5.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

### Main references
* Smith AP, Young TP  (1987) *Tropical alpine plant ecology*. **Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics** 18: 137-58. DOI: [10.1017/cbo9780511551475.021](http://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511551475.021)

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
