---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/mt_1_4
content-id: MT1.4
lang: en
title: MT1.4 Boulder and cobble shores
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Cobbled and boulder shores are exposed to wave action and tides, and are periodically restructured by high-energy storm events. Drift seaweed and local algae support communities of organisms adapted to regular disturbance and grinding of rocks and cobbles, as well as the high temperatures and desiccation common to all shorelines. For example, many live largely below the surface layers. Stability of the substrate, and hence the biota, depends on the size of the cobbles and boulders. Some encrusting species or algae like cordgrass can stabilise these shores and allow a wider range of plants and animals to establish.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These low-productivity, net heterotrophic systems are founded on unstable rocky substrates and share some ecological features with sandy beaches ([MT1.3](/explore/groups/MT1.3)) and rocky shores ([MT1.1](/explore/groups/MT1.1)). Traits of the biota reflect responses to regular substrate disturbance by waves and exposure of particles to desiccation and high temperatures. For example, in the high intertidal zone of boulder shores (where temperature and desiccation stress is most pronounced), fauna may be predominantly nocturnal. On cobble beaches, fauna are more abundant on the sub-surface because waves cause cobbles to grind against each other, damaging or killing attached fauna. Conversely, sandy beaches are where most fauna occupy surface sediments. Intermediate frequencies of disturbance lead to the greatest biodiversity. Only species with low tenacity (e.g. top shells) are found in surface sediments because they can detach and temporarily inhabit deeper interstices during disturbance events. High-tenacity species (e.g. limpets) or sessile species (e.g. macroalgae and barnacles) are more readily damaged, hence rare on cobble shores. Large boulders, however, are only disturbed during large storms and have more stable temperatures, so more fauna can persist on their surface. Encrusting organisms may cement boulders on the low shore, further stabilising them in turbulent water. Allochthonous wrack is the major source of organic matter on cobble beaches, but _in situ_ autotrophs include superficial algae and vascular vegetation dominated by halophytic forbs. On some cobble beaches of New England, USA, extensive intertidal beds of the cordgrass Spartina alterniflora stabilise cobbles and provide shade, facilitating establishment of mussels, barnacles, gastropods, amphipods, crabs, and algae. In stabilising cobbles and buffering wave energy, cordgrass may also facilitate plants higher on the intertidal shore.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Particle size (e.g. cobbles vs. boulders) and wave activity determine substrate mobility, hence the frequency of physical disturbance to biota. Ecosystem engineers modify these relationships by stabilising the substrate. Cobble beaches are typically steep because waves easily flow through large interstices between coarse beach particles, reducing the effects of backwash erosion. Hence swash and breaking zones tend to be similar widths. The permeability of cobble beaches leads to desiccation and heat stress at low tide along the beach surface gradient. Desiccation stress is extreme on boulder shores, playing a similar role in structuring communities as on rocky shores. The extent of the fine sediment matrix present amongst cobbles, water supply (i.e. rainfall), and the frequency of physical disturbance all influence beach vegetation. Alongshore grading of sediment by size could occur on long, drift dominated shorelines, which may influence sediment calibre on the beach.
 
# Distribution
 
Cobble beaches occur where rivers or glaciers delivered cobbles to the coast or where they were eroded from nearby coastal cliffs. They are most common in Europe and also occur in Bahrain, North America, and New Zealand’s South Island.

Marine ecoregions (Spalding _et al._ 2008) containing rocky shorelines and boulder and cobble shorelines, respectively, were identified by consulting regional substrate maps, imagery available in Google Earth (to exclude ecoregions with extensive sandy or muddy shores) and expertise of authors, proofed by specialist reviewers.

## Citation

MJ Bishop, SL McSweeney, AH Altieri and DA Keith. (2022). *MT1.4 Boulder and cobble shores*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: MT1.4.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

## References

### Main references
* Altieri AH, Silliman BR, Bertness MD  (2007) *Hierarchical organization via a facilitation cascade in intertidal cordgrass bed communities*. **The American Naturalist** 169: 195-206. DOI: [10.1086/510603](http://doi.org/10.1086/510603)
* Scott GAM  (1963) *The ecology of shingle beach plants*. **Journal of Ecology** 51: 517-527. DOI: [10.2307/2257745](http://doi.org/10.2307/2257745)

### Map references
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J  (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI: [10.1641/B570707](http://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
