---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/tf_1_2
content-id: TF1.2
lang: en
title: TF1.2 Subtropical/temperate forested wetlands
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-17 15:04:19'
---

Forested wetlands in temperate and subtropical climates undergo periodic flooding. One or two tree species dominate the canopy. Trees shape the flow of flood waters, the ground surface, and the understorey, as well as animal habitats. With flooding, complex aquatic food webs support turtles, frogs, fish and birds, but can produce microbial blooms with nutrients flushed from the floodplain. Many vertebrates use these wetlands as refuges during dry times.

# Ecological Traits
 
These hydrophilic forests and thickets have an open to closed tree or shrub canopy, 2–40 m tall, dependent on flood regimes or groundwater lenses. Unlike tropical forests ([TF1.1](/explore/groups/TF1.1)), they typically are dominated by one or very few woody species. Trees engineer fine-scale spatial heterogeneity in resource availability (water, nutrients, and light) and ecosystem structure, which affects the composition, form, and functional traits of understorey plants and fauna. Engineering processes include the alteration of sediments, (e.g. surface micro-topography by the growth of large roots), the deposition of leaf litter and woody debris, canopy shading, creation of desiccation refuges for fauna and the development of foraging or nesting substrates (e.g. tree hollows). Forest understories vary from diverse herbaceous assemblages to simple aquatic macrophyte communities in response to spatial and temporal hydrological gradients, which influence the density and relative abundance of algae, hydrophytes and dryland plants. Primary production varies seasonally and inter-annually and can be periodically high due to the mobilisation of nutrients on floodplains during inundation. Nutrients accumulate on floodplains during low flows, and may drive microbial blooms, leading to aquatic anoxia, and fish kills, which may be extensive when flushing occurs. Plant and animal life histories are closely connected to inundation (e.g. seed-fall, germination fish-spawning and bird breeding are stimulated by flooding). Inundation-phase aquatic food webs are moderately complex. Turtles, frogs, birds and sometimes fish exploit the alternation between aquatic and terrestrial phases. Waterbirds forage extensively on secondary production, stranded as floodplains recede, and breed in the canopies of trees or mid-storey. Forested wetlands are refuges for many vertebrates during droughts. Itinerant mammalian herbivores (e.g. deer and kangaroos) may have locally important impacts on vegetation structure and recruitment.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
These forests occur on floodplains, riparian corridors, and disconnected lowland flats. Seasonally and inter-annually variable water supply influences ecosystem dynamics. Allochthonous water and nutrient subsidies from upstream catchments supplement local resources and promote the extension of floodplain forests and their biota into arid regions (‘green tongues’). Water movement is critical for the connectivity and movement of biota, while some groundwater-dependent forests are disconnected. High-energy floods in riparian corridors displace standing vegetation and woody debris, redistribute nutrients, and create opportunities for dispersal and recruitment. Low-energy environments with slow drainage promote peat accumulation. Extreme drying and heat events may generate episodes of tree dieback and mortality. Fires may occur depending on the frequency of fire weather, ignition sources, and landscape context. 
 
# Distribution
 
Temperate and subtropical floodplains, riparian zones and lowland flats worldwide.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## References

**Citation**: R Mac Nally, RT Kingsford, JA Catford, B Robson and DA Keith. (2020). 'TF1.2 Subtropical/temperate forested wetlands'. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-17.

**Map version**: TF1.2.web.orig v2.0, updated 2020-10-20.

### Main references
*  Mac Nally R, Cunningham SC, Baker PJ, Horner GJ, Thomson JR  (2011) *Dynamics of Murray-Darling floodplain forests under multiple stressors: The past, present, and future of an Australian icon*. **Water Resources Research** 47, W00g05.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
