---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_6_4
content-id: T6.4
lang: en
title: T6.4 Temperate alpine grasslands and shrublands
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:46:10'
---

Temperate alpine grasslands and shrublands occur above the treeline, on temperate and boreal mountains worldwide. Seasonal productivity is limited by cold and snow cover, often with strong winds. Mosses, liverworts, lichens, flowering plants and low shrubs generally form a continuous cover, except where strong winds and dry conditions limit vegetation to sparse lichens and dwarf shrubs. Most fauna is seasonally active during warmer summer months, with insects and vertebrates having adaptations to extreme cold, including hibernation. Many species have restricted distributions, with strong barriers to dispersal between mountains.

# Ecological Traits
 
Mountain systems beyond the cold climatic treeline are dominated by grasses, herbs, or low shrubs (typically <1 m tall). Moderate-low and strictly seasonal productivity is limited by deep winter snow cover, extreme cold and frost during spring thaw, short growing seasons, desiccating winds, and, in some cases, by mass movement. Vegetation comprises a typically continuous cover of plants including bryophytes, lichens, C<sub>3</sub> grasses, sedges, forbs, and dwarf shrubs including cushion growth forms. However, the cover of vascular plants may be much lower in low-rainfall regions or in sites exposed to strong desiccating winds and often characterised by dwarf shrubs and lichens that grow on rocks (e.g. fjaeldmark). Throughout the world, alpine ecosystems are defined by the physiological temperature limits of trees, which are excluded where the growing season (i.e. days >0.9°C) is less than 90-94 days, with mean temperatures less than 6.5°C across the growing season. Other plants have morphological and ecophysiological traits to protect buds, leaves, and reproductive tissues from extreme cold, including growth forms with many branches, diminutive leaf sizes, sclerophylly, vegetative propagation, and cold-stratification dormancy. The vertebrate fauna includes a few hibernating residents and migratory herbivores and predators that are nomadic or have large home ranges. Aestivating insects include katydids, dipterans, and hemipterans. Local endemism and beta-diversity may be high due to steep elevational gradients, microhabitat heterogeneity, and topographic barriers to dispersal between mountain ranges, with evidence of both facilitation and competition.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Winters are long and cold, while summers are short and mild. Seasonal snow up to several metres deep provides insulation to over-wintering plants and animals. Severe frosts and desiccating winds characterise the spring thaw and exposed ridges and slopes. Severe storms may result from orographic-atmospheric instability. Typically there is a large precipitation surplus, but deficits occur in some regions. Steep elevational gradients and variation in micro-topography and aspect promote microclimatic heterogeneity. Steep slopes are subjected to periodic mass movements, which destroy surface vegetation.
 
# Distribution
 
Mountains in the temperate and boreal zones of the Americas, Europe, central Eurasia, west and north Asia, Australia, and New Zealand.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## References

**Citation**: DA Keith, F Essl, KR Young and CH Körner. (2020). *T6.4 Temperate alpine grasslands and shrublands*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. DOI:[10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en](https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en).  
**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

**Map version**: T6.4.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-20.

### Main references
* Körner C (2012) **Alpine treelines** Springer, Basel. ISBN [978-3-0348-0396-0](https://www.springer.com/978-3-0348-0396-0). DOI: [978-3-0348-0396-0](http://doi.org/978-3-0348-0396-0)
* Körner C  (2004) *Mountain biodiversity: its causes and function*. **Ambio** Special Report Number 13. The Royal Colloquium: Mountain Areas: A Global Resource, pp. 11-17. Springer, Berlin. DOI: [10.4324/9780429342585-1](http://doi.org/10.4324/9780429342585-1)
* Paulsen J, Körner C (2014) *A climate-based model to predict potential treeline position around the globe*. **Alpine Botany** 124, 1-12. DOI: [10.1007/s00035-014-0124-0](http://doi.org/10.1007/s00035-014-0124-0)

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
