---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/mt_1_2
content-id: MT1.2
lang: en
title: MT1.2 Muddy Shorelines
version: v2.0, 2020-06-15 14:09:49
---

SHORT DESCRIPTION IN PREPARATION

# Ecological Traits
 
Highly productive intertidal environments are defined by their fine particle size (dominated by silts) and are fuelled largely by allochthonous production. Benthic diatoms are the key primary producer. although ephemeral intertidal seagrass may occur. Otherwise, macrophytes are generally absent unlike other ecosystems on intertidal mudfalts ([MFT1.2](/explore/groups/MFT1.2), [MFT1.3](/explore/groups/MFT1.3)). Fauna are dominated by deposit-feeding taxa (consuming organic matter that accumulates in the fine-grained sediments) and detritivores feeding on wrack (<i>i.e.</i> drift algae deposited at the high-water mark) and other sources of macro-detritus. Bioturbating and tube-dwelling taxa are key ecosystem engineers, the former oxygenating and mixing the sediments and the latter providing structure to an otherwise sedimentary habitat. Infauna residing within sediments are protected from high temperatures and desiccation by the surrounding matrix and do not display the same marked patterns of zonation as rocky intertidal communities. Many infaunal taxa are soft-bodied. Nevertheless, competition for food resources carried by incoming tides can lead to intertidal gradients in fauna. Predators include the substantial shorebird populations that forage on infauna at low tide, including migratory species that depend on these systems as stopover sites. Fish, rays, crabs, and resident whelks forage around lugworm bioturbation. Transitions to mangrove ([MFT1.2](/explore/groups/MFT1.2)), saltmarsh or reedbed ([MFT1.3](/explore/groups/MFT1.3)) ecosystems may occur in response to isostatic or sea level changes, freshwater inputs or changes in currents that promote macrophyte colonisation.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
These are depositional environments influenced by sediment supply and the balance of erosion and sedimentation. They occur on lower wave energy coastlines with lower slopes and larger intertidal ranges than sandy shorelines, resulting in lower levels of sediment transport and oxygenation by physical processes. In the absence of burrowing taxa, sediments may display low rates of turnover, which may result in an anoxic zone close to the sediment surface. Small particle sizes limit interstitial spaces, further reducing aeration. The depth of the anoxic zone can be a key structuring factor. In contrast to sandy shorelines, they are organically rich and consequently higher in nutrients. Generally, muddy shorelines are formed from sediments supplied by nearby rivers, often remobilised from the seafloor throughout the tidal cycle.
 
# Distribution
 
Muddy shorelines occur along low-energy coastlines, in estuaries and embayments where the velocity of water is so low that the finest particles can settle to the bottom. 

The indicative map of Muddy shorelines is based on tidal flats mapped by Murray et al. (2019). Large aggregations of more than 1 km<sup>2</sup> resolution are shown as major occurrences, while the approximate location of smaller patches are indicated as minor occurrences. 

## References

**Contributors**: MJ Bishop, NJ Murray and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-15

### Main references
* NJ Murray, SR Phinn, M DeWitt, R Ferrari, R Johnston, MB Lyons, N Clinton, D Thau and RA Fuller  (2019) *The global distribution and trajectory of tidal flats*. **Nature** . DOI: [10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8)
* Peterson CH  (1991) *Intertidal zonation of marine invertebrates in sand and mud*. **American Scientist** 79:236-249. [URL](http://www.jstor.org/stable/29774371).
* Wilson WH  (1990) *Competition and predation in marine soft-sediment communities*. **Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics** . DOI: [10.1146/annurev.es.21.110190.001253](http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.21.110190.001253)

### Map References
* Murray NJ, Phinn SR, DeWitt M, Ferrari R, Johnston R, Lyons MB, Clinton N, Thau D, Fuller RA  (2019) *The global distribution and trajectory of tidal flats*. **Nature** 565: 222–225. DOI: [10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8)


