---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_2_3
content-id: F2.3
lang: en
title: F2.3 Seasonal freshwater lakes
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Small seasonal lakes, pools and rock holes have plants and animals specialised to seasonally changing wet and dry conditions in temperate and wet-dry tropical regions. Their energy comes mostly from algae and plants. To survive the annual wet/dry cycles, the animals and plants have dormant life stages, such as eggs or seeds, within the lake sediments, or they shelter in damp burrows or other refuges. Plants and animals can build up high abundances during wet seasons, supporting plankton and waterbugs, frogs, birds and mammals but, in most cases, no fish.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These small (mostly <5 km<sup>2</sup> in area) and shallow (<2 m deep) seasonal freshwater lakes, vernal pools, turloughs, or gnammas (panholes, rock pools), have a seasonal aquatic biota. Hydrological isolation promotes biotic insularity and local endemism, which occurs in some Mediterranean climate regions. Autochthonous energy sources are supplemented by limited allochthonous inputs from small catchments and groundwater. Seasonal variation in biota and productivity outweighs inter-annual variation, unlike in ephemeral lakes ([F2.5](/explore/groups/F2.5) and [F2.7](/explore/groups/F2.7)). Filling induces microbial activity, the germination of seeds and algal spores, hatching and emergence of invertebrates, and growth and reproduction by specialists and opportunistic colonists. Wind-induced mixing oxygenates the water, but eutrophic or unmixed waters may become anoxic and dominated by air-breathers as peak productivity and biomass fuel high biological oxygen demand. Anoxia may be abated diurnally by photosynthetic activity. Resident biota persists through seasonal drying on lake margins or in sediments as desiccation-resistant dormant or quiescent life stages, e.g. crayfish may retreat to burrows that extend to the water table, turtles may aestivate in sediments or fringing vegetation, amphibious perennial plants may persist on lake margins or in seedbanks. Trophic networks and niche diversity are driven by bottom-up processes, especially submerged and emergent macrophytes, and depend on productivity and lake size. Cyanobacteria, algae, and macrophytes are the major primary producers, while annual grasses may colonise dry lake beds. The most diverse lakes exhibit zonation and support phytoplankton, zooplankton, macrophytes, macroinvertebrate consumers, and seasonally resident amphibians (especially juvenile aquatic phases), waterbirds, and mammals. Rock pools have simple trophic structure, based primarily on epilithic algae or macrophytes, and invertebrates, but no fish. Invertebrates and amphibians may reach high diversity and abundance in the absence of fish.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Seasonal rainfall, surface flows, groundwater fluctuation and seasonally high evapo-transpiration drive annual filling and drying. These lakes are polymicitc, mixing continuously when filled. Impermeable substrates (e.g. clay or bedrock) impede infiltration in some lakes; in others groundwater percolates up through sand, peat or fissures in karstic limestone (turloughs). Small catchments, low-relief terrain, high area-to-volume ratios, and hydrological isolation promote seasonal fluctuation. Most lakes are hydrologically isolated, but some become connected seasonally by sheet flows or drainage lines. These hydrogeomorphic features also limit nutrient supply, in turn limiting pH buffering. Water fluctuations drive high rates of organic decomposition, denitrification, and sediment retention. High alkalinity reflects high anaerobic respiration. Groundwater flows may ameliorate hydrological isolation. Seasonal filling and drying induce spatio-temporal variability in temperature, depth, pH, dissolved oxygen, salinity, and nutrients, resulting in zonation within lakes and high variability among them.
 
# Distribution
 
Subhumid temperate and wet-dry tropical regions in monsoonal and Mediterranean-type climates but usually not semi-arid or arid regions.

Freshwater ecoregions (Abell _et al._ 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within those areas, locations of small lakes (<100km<sup>2</sup>), excluding artificial lakes (inclusion on types 1 and 3 only), were taken from the HydroLAKES database (Messager _et al._ 2016) and combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel _et al._ 2016), occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.

## Citation

RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, MC Rains, B Robson, K Irvine and DA Keith. (2022). *F2.3 Seasonal freshwater lakes*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: F2.3.web.mix v2.0, updated 2020-10-19.

## References

### Main references
* Keeley JE, Zedler PH  (1998) *Characterization and global distribution of vernal pools*. **Ecology, conservation and management of vernal pool ecosystems** (Eds ET Bauder et al.). California Native Plant Society, Sacramento..
* Pettit N, Jardine T , Hamilton S , Sinnamon V, Valdez D, Davies P, Douglas M, Bunn S (2012) *Seasonal changes in water quality and macrophytes and the impact of cattle on tropical floodplain waterholes*. **Marine and Freshwater Research** 63, 788-800.
* Rains MC, Fogg GE, Harter T, Dahlgren RA, Williamson RJ  (2006) *The role of perched aquifers in hydrological connectivity and biogeochemical processes in vernal pool landscapes, Central Valley, California*. **Hydrological Processes** 20: 1157-1175.

### Map references
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P  (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*. **BioScience** 58: 403–414. [Data-set](http://www.feow.org). DOI: [10.1641/B580507](http://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O.  (2016) *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications** 13603. DOI: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
* Pekel JF, Cottam A, Gorelick N, Belward AS (2016) *High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes*. **Nature** 540, 418-422. DOI: [10.1038/nature20584](http://doi.org/10.1038/nature20584)
