---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_4_2
content-id: T4.2
lang: en
title: T4.2 Pyric tussock savannas
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-15 12:01:20'
---

In pyric savannas, recurring fire is the principal agent that limits tree dominance and maintains tree-grass coexistence. Dominated by tussock grasses that grow tall during high-productivity wet summers and cure over dry winter seasons, these ecosystems occur on all major land masses at tropical and subtropical latitudes around the world. Large mammalian herbivores are usually present, but not at densities that limit grass growth or mediate tree-grass coexistence (unlike [T4.1](/explore/groups/T4.1)). Many plants have traits that promote  tolerate of seasonal drought, such as deciduous leaf phenology, subterranean storage organs and deep roots. Invertebrate detritivores, notably termites,  and vertebrate scavengers are key groups in the foodweb.

# Ecological Traits
 
Grassy woodlands and grasslands are dominated by C<sub>4</sub> tussock grasses, with some C<sub>3</sub> grasses in the Americas and variable tree cover. In the tropics, seasonally high productivity coincides with the timing of summer rains and grasses cure in dry winters, promoting flammability. This pattern also occurs in the subtropics but transitions occur with temperate woodlands ([T4.4](/explore/groups/T4.4)), which have different seasonal phenology, tree and grass dominance, and fire regimes. Tree basal area, abundance of plants with annual semelparous life cycles and abundant grasses with tall tussock growth forms are strongly dependent on mean annual rainfall (i.e. limited by seasonal drought). Local endemism is low across all taxa but regional endemism is high, especially in the Americas and Australasia. Plant traits such as deciduous leaf phenology or deep roots promote tolerance to seasonal drought and rapid resource exploitation. Woody plants have microphyll-notophyll foliage with moderate-high SLA and mostly high C:N ratios. Some C<sub>4</sub> grasses nonetheless accumulate high levels of rubisco, which may push down C:N ratios. Nitrogen volatilisation exceeds deposition because fire is the major consumer of biomass. Woody plant species are shade-intolerant during their establishment and develop fire-resistant organs (e.g. thick bark and below-ground bud banks). The contiguous ground layer of erect tussock grasses creates an aerated flammable fuel bed, while grass architecture with tightly clustered culms vent heat away from meristems. Patchy fires promote landscape-scale vegetation heterogeneity (e.g. in tree cover) and maintain the dominance of flammable tussock grasses over shrubs, especially in wetter climates, and hence sustain the system through positive feedbacks. Fires also enhance efficiency of predators. Vertebrate scavengers and invertebrate detritivores are key components of the trophic network and carbon cycle. Mammalian herbivores and predators are present but exert less top-down influence on the diverse trophic structure than fire. Consequently, plant physical defences against herbivores, such as spinescence are less prominent than in [T4.1](/explore/groups/T4.1).

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
An overall rainfall deficit up to ~1,200 mm or a modest surplus of up to 500 mm, always with strong seasonal (winter) drought with continuously warm-hot temperatures through the year, even though rainfall becomes less seasonal in the subtropics. Mean annual rainfall varies from 650 mm to 1,500 mm. Sub-decadal fire regimes of surface fires occur throughout the dry season, while canopy fires occur rarely, late in the dry season. Soils are of low-moderate fertility, often with high Fe and Al.
 
# Distribution
 
Seasonally dry tropics and subtropics of the Americas, Australia, Asia, and Africa.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## References

**Contributors**: CER Lehmann, A Etter, KR Young and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-15.

**Map version**: T4.2.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-05 by DA Keith and JR Ferrer-Paris.

### Main references
* Furley PA  (1999) *The nature and diversity of neotropical savanna vegetation with particular reference to the Brazilian cerrados*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 8, 223-241.
* Lehmann CER, Anderson TM, Sankaran M, Lehmann CE, Anderson TM, Sankaran M, Higgins SI, Archibald S, Hoffmann WA, Hanan NP, Williams RJ, Fensham RJ, Felfili J, Hutley LB (2014) *Savanna vegetation-fire-climate relationships differ among continents*. **Science** 343, 548–552.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
