---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/mt_2_1
content-id: MT2.1
lang: en
title: MT2.1 Coastal shrublands and grasslands
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-29 07:19:41'
---

A low diversity of specialised plants and animals live in grasslands, shrublands, and low forests on coastlines above the high tide mark where they are exposed to harsh conditions of salt influx, desiccating winds and sunshine, and disturbances associated with storms or unstable substrates (e.g. cliffs and dunes). Plants, for example, exhibit traits such as succulence and rhizomes to promote persistence in these conditions, and many organisms are widely dispersed by winds or ocean currents. Consumers like seabirds or seals move between terrestrial and marine environments.

# Ecological Traits
 
Relatively low productivity grasslands, shrublands, and low forests on exposed coastlines are limited by salt influx, water deficit, and recurring disturbances. Diversity is low across taxa and trophic networks are simple, but virtually all plants and animals have strong dispersal traits and most consumers move between adjacent terrestrial and marine ecosystems. Vegetation and substrates are characterised by strong gradients from sea to land, particularly related to aerosol salt inputs, substrate instability and disturbance associated with sea storms and wave action. Plant traits conferring salt tolerance (e.g. succulent and sub-succulent leaves and salt-excretion organs) are commonly represented. Woody plants with ramulose and/or decumbent growth forms and small (microphyll-nanophyll) leaves reflect mechanisms of persistence under exposure to strong salt-laden winds, while modular and rhizomatous growth forms of woody and non-woody plants promote persistence, regeneration, and expansion under regimes of substrate instability and recurring disturbance. These strong environmental filters promote local adaptation, with specialised genotypes and phenotypes of more widespread taxa commonly represented on the strandline. Fauna are highly mobile, although some taxa such as ground-nesting seabirds may be sedentary for some parts of their lifecycles. Ecosystem dynamics are characterised by disturbance-driven cycles of disruption and renewal, with early phases dominated by colonists and _in situ_ regenerators that often persist during the short intervals between successive disturbances.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Desiccating winds promote an overall water deficit and appreciable exposure to salinity due to aerosol influx and salt spray. Warm to mild temperatures across the tropics to temperate zones and cold temperatures in the cool temperate to boreal zones are moderated by direct maritime influence. Above the regular intertidal zone, these systems are exposed to periodic disturbance from exceptional tides, coastal storm events, wind shear, bioturbation, and aeolian substrate mobility. Consolidated substrates (headlands, cliffs) may differ from unconsolidated dunes in their influence on function and biota. Geomorphological depositional and erosional processes influence substrate stability and local vegetation succession.
 
# Distribution
 
Coastal dunes and cliffs throughout tropical, temperate, and boreal latitudes.

Coastlines were mapped with a 5 km buffer applied between 60°S and 60°N.

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith, J Loidi and ATR Acosta.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-29.

**Map version**: MT2.1.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-08-04.

### Main references
* van der Maarel E  (2001) *Dry coastal ecosystems: General aspects*. **Ecosystems of the world** 2C. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

### Map references
* Becker JJ, Sandwell DT, Smith WHF, Braud J, Binder B, Depner J, Fabre D, Factor J, Ingalls S, Kim S-H, Ladner R, Marks K, Nelson S, Pharaoh A, Trimmer R, Von Rosenberg J, Wallace G, Weatherall P  (2009) *Global Bathymetry and Elevation Data at 30 Arc Seconds Resolution: SRTM30_PLUS*. **Marine Geodesy** . DOI: [10.1080/01490410903297766](http://doi.org/10.1080/01490410903297766)
