---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/mft_1_2
content-id: MFT1.2
lang: en
title: MFT1.2 Intertidal forests and shrublands
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-29 07:27:45'
---

Mangroves create structurally complex and productive ecosystems in the intertidal zone of depositional coasts, around tropical and warm temperate regions. The biota includes aquatic and terrestrial species, and intertidal specialists. Large volumes of mangrove leaves and twigs are decomposed by fungi and bacteria, mobilising carbon and nutrients for invertebrates such as crabs, worms and snails. Shellfish and juvenile fish are protected from desiccation and predators amongst mangrove roots. Mangrove canopies support many terrestrial species, particularly birds. These forests are important carbon sinks, retaining organic matter in sediments and living biomass.

# Ecological Traits
 
Mangroves are structural engineers and possess traits including pneumatophores, salt excretion glands, vivipary, and propagule buoyancy that promote survival and recruitment in poorly aerated, saline, mobile, and tidally inundated substrates. They are highly efficient in nitrogen use efficiency and nutrient resorption. These systems are among the most productive coastal environments. They produce large amounts of detritus (e.g. leaves, twigs, and bark), which is either buried in waterlogged sediments, consumed by crabs, or more commonly decomposed by fungi and bacteria, mobilising carbon and nutrients to higher trophic levels. These ecosystems are also major blue carbon sinks, incorporating organic matter into sediments and living biomass. Although highly productive, these ecosystems are less speciose than other coastal biogenic systems. Crabs are among the most abundant and important invertebrates. Their burrows oxygenate sediments, enhance groundwater penetration, and provide habitat for other invertebrates such as molluscs and worms. Specialised roots (pneumatophores) provide a complex habitat structure that protects juvenile fish from predators and serves as hard substrate for the attachment of algae as well as sessile and mobile invertebrates (e.g. oysters, mussels, sponges, and gastropods). Mangrove canopies support invertebrate herbivores and other terrestrial biota including invertebrates, reptiles, small mammals, and extensive bird communities. These are highly dynamic systems, with species distributions adjusting to local changes in sediment distribution, tidal regimes, and local inundation and salinity gradients. 

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Mangroves are physiologically intolerant of low temperatures, which excludes them from regions where mean air temperature during the coldest months is below 20°C, where the seasonal temperature range exceeds 10°C, or where ground frost occurs. Many mangrove soils are low in nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus. Limited availability of nitrogen and phosphorus Regional distributions are influenced by interactions among landscape position, rainfall, hydrology, sea level, sediment dynamics, subsidence, storm-driven processes, and disturbance by pests and predators. Rainfall and sediment supply from rivers and currents promote mangrove establishment and persistence, while waves and large tidal currents destabilise and erode mangrove substrates, mediating local-scale dynamics in ecosystem distributions. High rainfall reduces salinity stress and increases nutrient loading from adjacent catchments, while tidal flushing also regulates salinity.
 
# Distribution
 
Widely distributed along tropical and warm temperate coastlines of the world. Large-scale currents may prevent buoyant seeds from reaching some areas.

The indicative map of Intertidal forests and shrublands ([MFT1.2](/explore/groups/MFT1.2)) was developed by resampling the known global distribution of mangrove forests for the year 2000 mapped by Giri _et al._ (2011). We used a buffer of 1km around the distribution data and a 30 arc second grid, thus large aggregations (> 1km<sup>2</sup>) are depicted as major occurrences, and the buffer areas with small occurrences are shown as minor occurrences. The original high-resolution data is available at [UNEP-WCMC](http://data.unep-wcmc.org/datasets/4).

## References

**Citation**: MJ Bishop, AH Altieri, TS Bianchi and DA Keith. (2020). *MFT1.2 Intertidal forests and shrublands*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: [IUCN](https://www.iucn.org/resources/publications).

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-29.

**Map version**: MFT1.2.web.orig v2.0, updated 2020-11-16.

### Main references
* Duke N, Ball M, Ellison J  (1998) *Factors influencing biodiversity and distributional gradients in mangroves*. **Global Ecology & Biogeography Letters** 7:27-47. DOI: [10.2307/2997695](http://doi.org/10.2307/2997695)
* Feller IC, Lovelock CE, Berger U,, McKee KL, Joye SB, Ball MC (2010) *Biocomplexity in mangrove ecosystems*. **Annual Review of Marine Science** 2, 395–417. DOI: [10.1146/annurev.marine.010908.163809](http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.marine.010908.163809)
* Krauss KW, Lovelock CE, McKee KL, López-Hoffman L, Ewe SM, Sousa WP  (2008) *Environmental drivers in mangrove establishment and early development: a review*. **Aquatic Botany** 89:105-27. DOI: [10.1016/j.aquabot.2007.12.014](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquabot.2007.12.014)

### Map references
* Giri C, Ochieng E, Tieszen LL, Zhu Z, Singh A, Loveland T, Masek J, Duke N  (2011) *Status and distribution of mangrove forests of the world using earth observation satellite data*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 20: 154-159. DOI: [10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00584.x](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00584.x)
