---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_3_2
content-id: F3.2
lang: en
title: F3.2 Constructed lacustrine wetlands
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-01 09:07:00'
---

Small farm dams, wastewater ponds and mine pits generally form lake-like environments, common in humid and semi-arid climates world-wide. Nutrient inputs vary greatly depending on purpose and surrounding land uses.  They are often warm and shallow, and biological productivity and diversity vary widely depending on the cover and state of fringing vegetation, with the most diverse examples rivalling equivalent natural wetlands.  Aquatic plants, plankton, algae and waterbugs may dominate in the shallows, supporting amphibians, turtles, fish, and waterbirds.

# Ecological Traits
 
Shallow, open water bodies have been constructed in diverse landscapes and climates. They may be fringed by amphibious vegetation, or else bedrock or bare soil maintained by earthworks or livestock trampling. Emergents rarely extend throughout the water body, but submerged macrophytes are often present. Productivity ranges from very high in wastewater ponds to low in mining and excavation pits, depending on depth, shape, history and management. Taxonomic and functional diversity range from levels comparable to natural lakes to much less, depending on productivity, complexity of aquatic or fringing vegetation, water quality, management and proximity to other waterbodies or vegetation. Trophic structure includes phytoplankton and microbial detritivores, with planktonic and invertebrate predators dominating limnetic zones. Macrophytes may occur in shallow littoral zones or submerged habitats, and some artificial water bodies include higher trophic levels including macroinvertebrates, amphibians, turtles, fish, and waterbirds. Fish may be introduced by people or arrive by flows connected to source populations, where these exist. Endemism is generally low, but these waterbodies may be important refuges for some species now highly depleted in their natural habitats. Life histories often reflect those found in natural waterbodies nearby, but widely dispersed opportunists dominate where water quality is poor. Intermittent water bodies support biota with drought resistance or avoidance traits, while permanently inundated systems provide habitat for mobile species such as waterbirds.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Water bodies are constructed for agriculture, mining, stormwater, ornamentation, wastewater, or other uses, or fill depressions left by earthworks, obstructing surface flow or headwater channels. Humans may directly or indirectly regulate inputs of water and chemicals (e.g. fertilisers, flocculants, herbicides), as well as water drawdown. Climate and weather also affect hydrology. Shallow depth and lack of shade may expose open water to rapid solar heating and hence diurnally warm temperatures. Substrates include silt, clay, sand, gravel, cobbles or bedrock, and fine sediments of organic material may build up over time. Nutrient levels are highest in wastewater or with run-off from fertilised agricultural land or urban surfaces. Some water bodies (e.g. mines and industrial wastewaters) have concentrated chemical toxins, extremes of pH or high salinities. Humans may actively introduce and remove the biota of various trophic levels (e.g. bacteria, algae, fish, and macrophytes) for water quality management or human consumption.
 
# Distribution
 
Scattered across most regions of the world occupied by humans. Farm dams covered an estimated 77,000km<sup>2</sup> globally in 2006.

Freshwater ecoregions (Abell _et al._ 2008) were identified as containing major or minor occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identifed in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. The selections were check by expert reviewers. Occurrences were mapped at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution.

## References

**Citation**: JL Nel, RT Kingsford, B Robson, M Kelly-Quinn, LJ Jackson, R Harper and DA Keith. (2020). 'F3.2 Constructed lacustrine wetlands'. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-01.

**Map version**: F3.2.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-19.

### Main references
* Chester ET, Robson BJ  (2013) *Anthropogenic refuges for freshwater biodiversity: Their ecological characteristics and management*. **Biological Conservation** 166: 64 – 75. DOI: [10.1016/j.biocon.2013.06.016](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2013.06.016)
* Downing JA, Prairie YT, Cole JJ, Duarte CM, Tranvik LJ, Striegl RG, McDowell WH, Kortelainen P, Caraco NF, Melack JM, Middelburg JJ (2006) *The global abundance and size distribution of lakes, ponds, and impoundments*. **Limnology and Oceanography** 51: 2388-2397. DOI: [10.4319/lo.2006.51.5.2388](http://doi.org/10.4319/lo.2006.51.5.2388)
* Kloskowski J, Green AJ, Polak M, Bustamante J, Krogulec J  (2009) *Complementary use of natural and artificial wetlands by waterbirds wintering in Doñana, south‐west Spain*. **Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems** 19: 815-826. DOI: [10.1002/aqc.1027](http://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.1027)

### Map references
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P  (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*. **BioScience** 58: 403–414. [Data-set](http://www.feow.org). DOI: [10.1641/B580507](http://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
