---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/sm_1_3
content-id: SM1.3
lang: en
title: SM1.3 Sea caves
version: v2.0, 2020-06-17 15:07:03
---

SHORT DESCRIPTION IN PREPARATION

# Ecological Traits
 
Sea caves (also known as marine or littoral caves) are usually formed by wave action abrasion in various rock types. In contrast to anchialine caves ([SM1.1](/explore/groups/SM1.1)), sea caves are not isolated from the external marine environment. Thus, the biota in sea caves are mostly stygophiles (typical of dim-light cryptic and deep-water environments outside caves) or stygoxenes (species sheltering in caves during daytime but foraging outside at night). However, numerous taxa (mostly sessile invertebrates) have so far been reported only from sea caves, and thus can be considered as cave-exclusive sensu lato. Visitors often enter sea caves by chance (<i>e.g.</i> carried in by currents), and survive only for short periods. The diverse sea-cave biota is dominated by sessile (<i>e.g.</i> sponges, cnidarians, bryozoans) and mobile invertebrates (<i>e.g.</i> molluscs crustaceans, annelids,) and fish. Photoautotrophs are restricted close to cave openings, while chemoautotrophic bacteria form extensive mats in sea caves with hydrothermal sulphur springs, similar to those in some terrestrial caves ([SF1.1](/explore/groups/SF1.1)) and deep sea vents ([M3.7](/explore/groups/M3.7)). In semi-dark and dark cave sectors, the main trophic categories are filter-feeders (passive and active), detritivores, carnivores, and omnivores. Decomposers also play important roles. Filter-feeders consume plankton and suspended organic material delivered by tidal currents and waves. Other organisms either feed on the organic material produced by filter-feeders or move outside caves in order to find food. These “migrants”, especially swarm-forming crustaceans and schooling fish, can be significant import pathways for organic matter, mitigating oligotrophy in confined cave sectors. 
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Sea caves openings vary from fully submerged and never exposed to the atmosphere to partially submerged and exposed to waves and tides. Sea caves are generally shorter and receive less input of freshwater from terrestrial sources than anchialine caves ([SM1.1](/explore/groups/SM1.1)). Sea caves thus lack haloclines, a defining feature of anchialine caves, and are influenced more strongly by marine waters and biota throughout their extent. While salinity gradients are weak, the decrease of light and sea water renewal from the opening to the cave interior drive marked zonation of biota by creating oligotrophic conditions and limiting larval supply. Submersion level, cave morphology and micro-topography play key roles in forming such gradients.

 
# Distribution
 
Globally distributed in coastal headlands, rocky reefs and in coral reefs.

Marine ecoregions (Spalding et al. 2008) containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, and expertise of authors.

## References

**Contributors**: V Gerovasileiou, TM Iliffe, B Gonzalez, D Brankovits, A Martínez García and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-17.

### Main references
* Cicogna F, Bianchi CN, Ferrari G, Forti P (2003) **Le grotte marine: cinquant’anni di ricerca in Italia** Ministero dell’Ambiente e della Tutela del Territorio: Roma.
* Gerovasileiou V, Bianchi CN (2019) **Mediterranean marine caves: a synthesis of current knowledge** MedKeyHabitats II Project (UNEP-MAP, SPA/RAC: Tunis.
* Gerovasileiou V, Martínez A, Álvarez F, Boxshall G, Humphreys W, Jaume D, Becking L, Muricy G, van Hengstum P, Dekeyzer S, Decock W, Vanhoorne B, Vandepitte L, Bailly N, Iliffe T (2016) *World Register of marine Cave Species (WoRCS): a new thematic species database for marine and anchialine cave biodiversity*. **Research Ideas and Outcomes** 2, e10451.
* Riedl R (1966) **Biologie der Meereshöhlen** Paul Parey: Hamburg.

### Map references
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J  (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI: [10.1641/B570707](http://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)


