---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_2_5
content-id: T2.5
lang: en
title: T2.5 Temperate pyric humid forests
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-15 11:59:35'
---

Forests with the tallest flowering trees on earth are complex in structure, with an open canopy of sclerophyll trees 40-90m tall allowing light to filter through to multiple understorey layers and a ground flora of ferns, grasses and mosses. The complex forest structure sustains a high diversity of birds, reptiles mammals, and canopy invertebrates, as well as a moist microclimate and deep, moist leaf litter on the forest floor that supports a diversity of soil invertebrates, fungi, and other microbes. These highly productive, fast-growing forests are notable carbon sinks, but extreme droughts make them prone to the most ferocious forest fires on earth at century-scale intervals. Seedbanks are crucial to the forest persisting after fire.

# Ecological Traits
 
This group includes the tallest forests on earth. They are moist, multi-layered forests in wet-temperate climates with complex spatial structure and very high biomass and LAI. The upper layer is an open canopy of sclerophyllous trees 40–90-m tall with long, usually unbranched trunks. The open canopy structure allows light transmission sufficient for the development of up to three subcanopy layers, consisting mostly of non-sclerophyllous trees and shrubs with higher SLA than the upper canopy species. These forests are highly productive, grow rapidly, draw energy from autochthonous sources and store very large quantities of carbon, both above and below ground. They have complex trophic networks with a diverse invertebrate, reptile, bird, and mammal fauna with assemblages that live primarily in the tree canopy or the forest floor, and some that move regularly between vertical strata. Some species are endemic and have traits associated with large trees, including the use of wood cavities, thick or loose bark, large canopies, woody debris, and deep, moist leaf litter. There is significant diversification of avian foraging methods and hence a high functional and taxonomic diversity of birds. High deposition rates of leaf litter and woody debris sustain diverse fungal decomposers and invertebrate detritivores and provide nesting substrates and refuges for ground mammals and avian insectivores. The shade-tolerant ground flora may include a diversity of ferns forbs, grasses (mostly C<sub>3</sub>), and bryophytes. The dominant trees are shade-intolerant and depend on tree-fall gaps or periodic fires for regeneration. In cooler climates, trees are killed by canopy fires but may survive surface fires, and canopy seedbanks are crucial to persistence. Epicormic resprouting (i.e. from aerial stems) is more common in warmer climates. Subcanopy and ground layers include both shade-tolerant and shade-intolerant plants, the latter with physically and physiologically dormant seedbanks that cue episodes of mass regeneration to fire. Multi-decadal or century-scale canopy fires consume biomass, liberate resources, and trigger life-history processes in a range of biota. Seedbanks sustain plant diversity through storage effects.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
There is an annual water surplus with seasonal variation (peak surplus in winter) and rare major summer deficits associated with inter-annual drought cycles. Multiple tree layers produce a light diminution gradient and moist micro-climates at ground level. Winters are cool and summers are warm with occasional heatwaves that dry out the moist micro-climate and enable periodic fires, which may be extremely intense and consume the canopy. The growing season is 6–8 months. Snow is uncommon and short-lived. Soils are relatively fertile, but often limited in Nitrogen.
 
# Distribution
 
Subtropical - temperate southeast and temperate southwest Australia.

Remote sensing estimates of canopy height were used as a direct indicator of the distribution of this group of tall forest ecosystems  (Armston _et al._ 2015, Hao _et al._ 2019). We selected all areas with tree canopies taller than 40m, and clipped to the spatial extent of temperate climate types (Beck _et al._ 2018). Mapped occurrences were then aggregated to half degree spatial resolution and reclassified as major occurrences (>20% of cell area) and minor occurrences (< 20% of cell area).

## References

**Citation**: DA Keith and RC Mac Nally. (2020). 'T2.5 Temperate pyric humid forests'. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-15.

**Map version**: T2.5.web.alt v2.0, updated 2020-11-16.

### Main references
* Mac Nally RC  (1995) *On large-scale dynamics and community structure in forest birds: Lessons from some eucalypt forests of southeastern Australia*. **Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B** 350B: 369-79.
* Wardell-Johnson G, Neldner J, Balmer J  (2017) * Wet sclerophyll forests*. **Australian vegetation** (Ed. DA Keith), pp 281-313. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN [978-1-107-11843-0](http://www.cambridge.org/9781107118430).

### Map references
* Armston, J., Scarth, P., Lucas, R., Lewis, P., Disney, M., Phinn, S.  (2015) *Validation of continental scale vertical plant profile mapping using waveform lidar airborne laser scanning*. **Silvilaser 2015** (Conference Proceedings). La Grande Motte, France, 28-30 September..
* Beck, H., Zimmermann, N., McVicar, T. et al. (2018) *Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution*. **Sci Data** 5, 180214. DOI: [10.1038/sdata.2018.214](http://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.214)
* Hao Tang, John Armston, Steven Hancock, Suzanne Marselis, Scott Goetz, Ralph Dubayah  (2019) *Characterizing global forest canopy cover distribution using spaceborne lidar*. **Remote Sensing of Environment** . DOI: [10.1016/j.rse.2019.111262](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.111262)
