---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/mt_1_3
content-id: MT1.3
lang: en
title: MT1.3 Sandy Shorelines
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-28 11:50:19'
---

Beaches, sand bars and spits are exposed to waves and tides on moderate-high energy coasts, and rely on drift seaweed and surf-zone phytoplankton for nutrients. Polychaete worms, bivalve shellfish and a range of smaller invertebrates burrow in the shifting sediments, while larger vertebrate animals like seabirds, egg-laying turtles and scavenging foxes can also be found at various times.  Storm tides and waves periodically restructure the sediments and profoundly influence the traits of the organisms living in these highly dynamic systems.

# Ecological Traits
 
Sandy shorelines include beaches, sand bars, and spits. These intertidal systems typically lack macrophytes, with their low productivity largely underpinned by detrital subsidies dominated by wrack (i.e. drift seaweed accumulating at the high-water mark) and phytoplankton, particularly in the surf zone of dissipative beaches. Salt- and drought-tolerant primary producers dominate adjacent dune systems ([TM1.4](/explore/groups/TM1.4)). Meio-faunal biomass in many instances exceeds macrofaunal biomass. In the intertidal zone, suspension-feeding is a more common foraging strategy among invertebrates than deposit-feeding, although detritivores may dominate higher on the shore where wrack accumulates. Invertebrate fauna are predominantly interstitial, with bacteria, protozoans, and small metazoans contributing to the trophic network. Sediments are constantly shifting and thus invertebrate fauna are dominated by mobile taxa that display an ability to burrow and/or swash-ride up and down the beach face with the tides. The transitional character of these systems supports marine and terrestrial invertebrates and itinerant vertebrates from marine waters (e.g. egg-laying turtles) and from terrestrial or transitional habitats (e.g. shorebirds foraging on invertebrates or foxes foraging on carrion).

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Physical factors are generally more important ecological drivers than biological factors. Particle size and wave and tidal regimes determine beach morphology, all of which influence the spatial and temporal availability of resources and niche diversity. Particle size is influenced by sediment sources as well as physical conditions and affects interstitial habitat structure. Wave action maintains substrate instability and an abundant supply of oxygen through turbulence. Tides and currents influence the dispersal of biota and regulate daily cycles of desiccation and hydration as well as salinity. Beach morphology ranges from narrow and steep (i.e. reflective) to wide and flat (i.e. dissipative) as sand becomes finer and waves and tides larger. Reflective beaches are accretional and more prevalent in the tropics; dissipative beaches are erosional and more common in temperate regions. Sands filter large volumes of seawater, with the volume greater on reflective than dissipative beaches. Beaches are linked to nearshore surf zones and coastal dunes through the storage, transport, and exchange of sand. Sand transport is the highest in exposed surf zones and sand storage the greatest in well-developed dunes.
 
# Distribution
 
Sandy shores are most extensive at temperate latitudes, accounting for 31% of the ice-free global coastline, including 66% of the African coast and 23% of the European coast.

The indicative map of Sandy shorelines was based on point records of sandy coastlines mapped by Vousdoukas _et al._ (2020) aggregated to 1 degree spatial resolution. Cells with >50 points were reclassified as major occurrences, and those with 1-50 points were reclassified as minor occurrences. These were clipped to the coastline.

## References

**Contributors**: MJ Bishop, SL McSweeney and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-28.

**Map version**: MT1.3.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-08-04.

### Main references
* Luijendijk A, Hagenaars G, Ranasinghe R, Baart F, Donchyts G, Aarninkhof S  (2018) *The State of the World’s Beaches*. **Scientific reports** 8(1) 6641. DOI: [10.1038/s41598-018-24630-6](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-24630-6)
* Schlacher TA, Schoeman DS, Dugan J, Lastra M, Jones A, Scapini F, McLachlan A.  (2008) *Sandy beach ecosystems: key features, sampling issues, management challenges and climate change impacts*. **Marine Ecology** 29(S1):70-90. DOI: [10.1111/j.1439-0485.2007.00204.x ](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0485.2007.00204.x )

### Map references
* Vousdoukas, M., Ranasinghe, R., Mentaschi, L., Plomaritis, T., Athanasiou, P., Luijendijk, A. and Feyen, L. (2020) *Sandy coastlines under threat of erosion*. **Nature Climate Change** 10, 260–263. DOI: [10.1038/s41558-020-0697-0](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-020-0697-0)
