---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_2_8
content-id: F2.8
lang: en
title: F2.8 Artesian springs and oases
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Surface waterbodies fed by (often warm) groundwaters rising to the surface are scattered in dry landscapes of Africa, the Middle East, Eurasia, North America and Australia, but also occur in humid landscapes. Algae, floating plants and leaf fall support waterbugs, crustaceans and small fish making simple foodwebs with some locally restricted species found nowhere else. These ecosystems are sometimes important waterholes for birds and mammals, in otherwise dry landscapes.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These groundwater-dependent systems are fed by artesian waters that discharge to the surface. They are.surrounded by dry landscapes and receive little surface inflow, being predominantly disconnected from surface-stream networks. Insularity from the broader landscape results in high levels of endemism in sedentary aquatic biota, which are likely descendants of relic species from a wetter past. Springs may be spatially clustered due to their association with geological features such as faults or outcropping aquifers. Even springs in close proximity may have distinct physical and biological differences. Some springs have outflow streams, which may support different assemblages of plants and invertebrates to those in the spring orifice. Artesian springs and oases tend to have simple trophic structures. Autotrophs include aquatic algae and floating vascular plants, with emergent amphibious plants in shallow waters. Terrestrial plants around the perimeter contribute subsidies of organic matter and nutrients through litter fall. Consumers and predators include crustaceans, molluscs, arachnids, insects, and small-bodied fish. Most biota are poorly dispersed and have continuous life cycles and other traits specialised for persistence in hydrologically stable, warm, or hot mineral-rich water. Springs and oases are reliable watering points for wide-ranging birds and mammals, which function as mobile links for resources and promote the dispersal of other biota between isolated wetlands in the dryland matrix.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Flow of artesian water to the surface is critical to these wetlands, which receive little input from precipitation or runoff. Hydrological variability is low compared to other wetland types, but hydrological connections with deep regional aquifers, basin-fill sediments and local watershed recharge drive lagged flow dynamics. Flows vary over geological timeframes, with evidence of cyclic growth, waning, and extinction. Discharge waters tend to have elevated temperatures, are polymicitic and enriched in minerals that reflect their geological origins. The precipitation of dissolved minerals (e.g. carbonates) and deposition by wind and water form characteristic cones or mounds known as “mound springs”. Perennial flows and hydrological isolation from other spatially and temporally restricted surface waters make these wetlands important ecological refuges in arid landscapes.
 
# Distribution
 
Scattered throughout arid regions in southern Africa, the Sahara, the Middle East, central Eurasia, southwest of North America, and Australia’s Great Artesian Basin.

Freshwater ecoregions (Abell _et al._ 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within those areas, locations of small lakes (<100km<sup>2</sup>), excluding artificial lakes (inclusion on types 1 and 3 only), were taken from the HydroLAKES database (Messager _et al._ 2016) and combined with global estimates of surface water phenology (classes 1, 2 and 7 from Pekel _et al._ 2016), occurrences were aggregated to 10 minutes spatial resolution.

## Citation

DJ Roux, RT Kingsford, AH Arthington and DA Keith. (2022). *F2.8 Artesian springs and oases*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: F2.8.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-10-19.

## References

### Main references
* Patten DT, Rouse L, Stromberg JC  (2008) *Isolated spring wetlands in the Great Basin and Mojave Deserts, USA: potential response of vegetation to groundwater withdrawal*. **Environmental Management** 41: 398-413.
* Rossini R, Fensham R, Stewart-Koster B, Gotch T, Kennard M (2018) *Biographical patterns of endemic diversity and its conservation in Australia’s artesian desert springs*. **Diversity and Distributions** 24, 1-18. DOI: [10.1111/ddi.12757](http://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12757)
* Worthington Wilmer J, Elkin C, Wilcox C, Murray L, Niejalke D, Possingham H  (2008) *The influence of multiple dispersal mechanisms and landscape structure on population clustering and connectivity in fragmented artesian spring snail populations*. **Molecular Ecology** 17: 3733-3751.

### Map references
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P  (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*. **BioScience** 58: 403–414. [Data-set](http://www.feow.org). DOI: [10.1641/B580507](http://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O.  (2016) *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications** 13603. DOI: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)
* Pekel JF, Cottam A, Gorelick N, Belward AS (2016) *High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes*. **Nature** 540, 418-422. DOI: [10.1038/nature20584](http://doi.org/10.1038/nature20584)
