---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_7_3
content-id: T7.3
lang: en
title: T7.3 Plantations
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:54:58'
---

Plantations are generally long-rotation perennial woody crops established and maintained for a variety of food and materials. The harvested products include wood, various fruits, tea, coffee, palm oil and other food additives, materials such as rubber, ornamental materials (cut flowers), etc. The vegetation of most plantations comprises at least two vertical strata (the managed woody species and a ruderal ground layer), although mixed plantings may be more complex and host a relatively diverse flora and fauna if managed to promote habitat features. Fertilisers and water subsidies are applied, and harvesting occurs at intervals depending on the crop.

# Ecological Traits
 
These moderate to high productivity autotrophic systems are established by the translocation (i.e. planting or seeding) of woody perennial plants. Target biota may be genetically manipulated by selective breeding or molecular engineering to promote rapid growth rates, efficient resource capture, enhanced resource allocation to production tissues, and tolerance of harsh environmental conditions, insect predators, and diseases. The diversity, structure, composition, function, and successional trajectory of the ecosystem depends on the identity, developmental stage, density, and traits (e.g. phenology, physiognomy, and growth rates) of planted species, as well as the subsequent management of plantation development. Most plantations comprise at least two vertical strata (the managed woody species and a ruderal ground layer). Mixed forest plantings may be more complex and host a relatively diverse flora and fauna if managed to promote habitat features. Cyclical harvest may render the habitat periodically unsuitable for some biota. Mixed cropping systems may comprise two vertical strata of woody crops or a woody and herbaceous layer. Secondary successional processes involve colonisation and regeneration, initially of opportunistic biota. Successional feedbacks occur as structural complexity increases, promoting visits or colonisation by vertebrates and the associated dispersal of plants and other organisms. Crop replacement (which may occur on inter-annual or decadal cycles), the intensive management of plantation structure, or the control of non-target species may reset, arrest, or redirect successional processes. Examples with increasing management intervention include: environmental plantations established for wildlife or ecosystem services; agroforestry plantings for subsistence products or livestock benefits; forestry plantations for timber, pulp, fibre, bio-energy, rubber, or oils; and vineyards, orchards, and other perennial food crops (e.g. cassava, coffee, tea, palm oil, and nuts). Secondary (regrowth) forests and shrublands are not included as plantations even where management includes supplementary translocations.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
High to moderate natural availability of water and nutrients is supplemented by human inputs of fertiliser or mulch, landscape drainage modifications (e.g. surface earthworks), and, in intensively managed systems, irrigation. Rainfall is at least seasonally high. Temperatures are mild to warm, at least seasonally. Artificial disturbance regimes involving the complete or partial removal of biomass and soil turnover are implemented at sub-decadal to multi-decadal frequencies. 
 
# Distribution
 
Tropical to cool temperate humid climatic zones or river flats in dry climates across south sub-Saharan and Mediterranean Africa, Europe, Asia, southern Australia, Oceania, and the Americas.

Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu _et al._ 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith and KR Young.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

**Map version**: T7.3.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-07-31.

### Main references
* Kanninen M  (2010) *Plantation forests: global perspectives*. **Ecosystem goods and services from plantation forests** (Eds. J Bauhus, PJ van der Meer, M Kanninen), pp1-15. Earthscan, London.
* Monfreda CN, Ramankutty N, Foley JA  (2008) *Farming the planet: 2. Geographic distribution of crop areas, yields, physiological types, and net primary production in the year 2000*. **Global Biogeochemical Cycles** 22: GB1022.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
