---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_3_5
content-id: F3.5
lang: en
title: F3.5 Canals and storm water drains
version: v1.0, 2020-01-20 12:00:00
---

SHORT DESCRIPTION IN PREPARATION

# Ecological Traits
 
Canals, including channels and ditches, and storm water drains are artificial streams with low horizontal and vertical heterogeneity. They function as rivers with simplified habitat structure and trophic networks. The main primary producers are filamentous algae and macrophytes that thrive on allochthonous subsidies of nutrients. Subsidies of organic carbon from urban or rural landscapes support microbial decomposers and small invertebrate detritivores. Sealed or otherwise uniform canal bottoms and banks limit the diversity and abundance of benthic biota. Fish and crustacean communities, when present, exhibit low diversity and often dominated by introduced or invasive species. Their individuals are smaller in size, compared to natural systems. The waterbird fauna is similarly limited, but may include a low diversity and density of herbivorous and piscivorous species. Canals and storm water drains may provide pathways for incidental movement or colonisation of biota, often by invasive species.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Engineered levees and channels enable managed water flow for human uses. The major functions are to deliver water for irrigation or recreation, remove water from poorly drained sites or sealed surfaces (e.g. storm water drains) or provide navigation routes. Flows for irrigation, transport or recreation are usually perennial but may be seasonal for irrigation or intermittent where the water source is small. Flows in drains vary with rain or other inputs. Turbidity varies with flow but oxygen content is usually high. Earthen or hard surfaces (e.g. concrete) of banks and bottoms generally lack the heterogeneity present in natural streams, and hence niche diversity is low. The deterministic water regimes and often shallow depth also limit niche diversity and have major influences on the physical, chemical, and biological properties of the canals and storm water drains. The water often carries high levels of nutrients and pollutants due to inflow and sedimentation from sealed surfaces, sewerage, other waste sources, fertilised cropping or pasture land.
 
# Distribution
 
Urban landscapes and irrigation areas in temperate and subtropical latitudes.

MAP IN PREPARATION

## References

### Main references
* Nunes AL, Tricarico E, Panov VE, Cardoso AC, Katsanevakis S (2015) Pathways and gateways of freshwater invasions in Europe. Aquatic Invasions 10: 359 - 370. Ricciardi A (2006) Patterns of invasion in the Laurentian Great Lakes in relation to changes in vector activity. Diversity and Distributions 12: 425-433.
* Chester ET, Robson BJ (2013) Anthropogenic refuges for freshwater biodiversity: Their ecological characteristics and management. Biological Conservation 166: 64 – 75.

### Map References
* 
