---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/mt_1_1
content-id: MT1.1
lang: en
title: MT1.1 Rocky Shorelines
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-28 11:44:33'
---

Waves, tides and a gradient of exposure drive the structure and function of these productive intertidal ecosystems found mostly on high energy coasts. The biota includes filter feeders like barnacles, mussels and sea squirts which compete for limited space. Grazers like limpets and urchins consume small sessile algae, while predators such as crabs, fish and birds consume a wide range of prey. Organisms use microhabitats during low tide (e.g. rockpools, crevices) or have adaptations like shells to survive exposure to high temperatures, salinity and desiccation.

# Ecological Traits
 
These intertidal benthic systems, composed of sessile and mobile species, are highly structured by fine-scale resource and stress gradients, as well as trade-offs among competitive, facilitation, and predatory interactions. Sessile algae and invertebrates form complex three-dimensional habitats that provide microhabitat refugia from desiccation and temperature stress for associated organisms; these weaken competitive interactions. The biota exhibit behavioural and morphological adaptions to minimise exposure to stressors, such as seeking shelter in protective microhabitats at low tide, possessing exoskeletons (e.g. shells), or producing mucous to reduce desiccation. Morphologies, such as small body sizes and small cross-sectional areas to minimise drag, reflect adaptation to a wave-swept environment. Key trophic groups include filter-feeders (which feed on phytoplankton and dissolved organic matter at high tide), grazers (which scrape microphytobenthos and macroalgal spores from rock or consume macroalgal thalli), and resident (e.g. starfish, whelks, and crabs) and transient (e.g. birds and fish) marine and terrestrial predators. Rocky shores display high endemism relative to other coastal systems and frequently display high productivity due to the large amounts of light they receive, although this can vary according to nutrient availability from upwelling.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Tides and waves are the key ecological drivers, producing resource availability and physical disturbance gradients vertically and horizontally, respectively. Across the vertical gradient of increasing aerial exposure, desiccation and temperature stress increases, time available for filter-feeding decreases, and interactions with marine and terrestrial predators vary. The horizontal gradient of diminishing wave exposure from headlands to bays or inlets influences community composition and morphology. Many organisms rely on microhabitats formed from natural rock features (e.g. crevices, depressions, and rock pools) or habitat-forming species (e.g. canopy-forming algae, mussels, oysters, and barnacles) to persist in an environment that would otherwise exceed their environmental tolerances. Rocky shores are open systems, so community structure can be influenced by larval supply, coastal upwelling, and competition. Competition for space may limit the lower vertical distributions of some sessile species. The limited space available for the growth of marine primary producers can result in competition for food among grazers. Disturbances (i.e. storms, ice scour on subpolar shores) that free-up space can have a strong influence on community structure and diversity.
 
# Distribution
 
Found globally at the margins of oceans, where waves are eroding rocks. They are the most common ecosystems on open, high-energy coasts and also occur on many sheltered and enclosed coastlines, such as sea lochs, fjords, and rias.

Marine ecoregions (Spalding _et al._ 2008) containing rocky shorelines and boulder and cobble shorelines, respectively, were identified by consulting regional substrate maps, imagery available in Google Earth (to exclude ecoregions with extensive sandy or muddy shores) and expertise of authors, proofed by specialist reviewers. Occurrences were aggregated to 1 degree spatial resolution.

## References

**Contributors**: MJ Bishop, LB Firth, SL McSweeney, TP Crowe, AH Altieri and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-28.

**Map version**: MT1.1.web.grid v2.0, updated 2020-07-30.

### Main references
* Connell JH  (1972) *Community interactions on marine rocky intertidal shores*. **Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics** 3:169-192. DOI: [10.1146/annurev.es.03.110172.001125](http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.03.110172.001125)
* Thompson RC, Crowe TP, Hawkins SJ  (2002) *Rocky intertidal communities: past environmental changes, present status and predictions for the next 25 years*. **Environmental Conservation** 29:168-91. DOI: [10.1017/s0376892902000115](http://doi.org/10.1017/s0376892902000115)

### Map references
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J  (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI: [10.1641/B570707](http://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
