---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_3_1
content-id: F3.1
lang: en
title: F3.1 Large reservoirs
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-18 14:03:02'
---

Large dams or reservoirs occur in humid, populated areas of the world. Their biological productivity and diversity is generally limited due to their depth and frequent and large changes in water level. Shallow zones have the highest diversity, with simple food webs of algae, waterbugs, birds, frogs and aquatic plants, often supporting introduced fish species.  Plankton live at the surface, but life is scarce in the depths. Algal blooms may be common if there are high nutrient inputs from rivers.

# Ecological Traits
 
Rivers are impounded by the construction of dam walls, creating large freshwater reservoirs, mostly 15–250 m deep. Primary productivity is low to moderate and restricted to the euphotic zone (limnetic and littoral zones), varying with turbidity and associated light penetration, nutrient availability, and water temperature. Trophic networks are simple with low species diversity and endemism. Shallow littoral zones have the highest species diversity including benthic algae, macroinvertebrates, fish, waterbirds, aquatic reptiles, aquatic macrophytes, and terrestrial or amphibious vertebrates. Phytoplankton and zooplankton occur through the littoral and limnetic zones. The profundal zone lacks primary producers and, if oxygenated, is dominated by benthic detritivores and microbial decomposers. Fish communities inhabit the limnetic and littoral zones and may be dominated by managed species and opportunists. Reservoirs may undergo eutrophic succession due to inflow from catchments with sustained fertiliser application or other nutrient inputs.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
Reservoirs receive water from the rivers they impound. Managed release or diversion of  water alters natural variability. Large variations in water level produce wide margins that are intermittently inundated or dry, limiting productivity and the number of species able to persist there. Inflow volumes may be regulated. Inflows may contain high concentrations of phosphorus and/or nitrogen (e.g. from sewerage treatment effluents or fertilised farmland), leading to eutrophication. Reservoirs in upper catchments generally receive less nutrients and cooler water (due to altitude) than those located downstream. Geomorphology, substrate, and land use of the river basin influence the amount of inflowing suspended sediment, and hence turbidity, light penetration, and the productivity of planktonic and benthic algae, as well as rates of sediment build-up on the reservoir floor. Depth gradients in light and oxygen, as well as thermal stratification, strongly influence the structure of biotic communities and trophic interactions, as do human introductions of fish, aquatic plants, and other alien species.
 
# Distribution
 
Large reservoirs are scattered across all continents with the greatest concentrations in Asia, Europe, and North America.  Globally, there are more than 3000 reservoirs with a surface area ≥ 50km<sup>2</sup>.

Point locations of large reservoirs were obtained from water bodies tagged as 'reservoirs' in "reservoirs" in vector layers GLWD1 and GLWD2 of Lehner & Döll (2004). These were mapped with a spatial buffer of 15 minutes, enabling reservoirs to be represented in 0.5 degree grid cells.

## References

**Citation**: DJ Roux, RT Kingsford, CA Reidy Liermann, B Robson, M Kelly-Quinn and DA Keith. (2020). *F3.1 Large reservoirs*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. DOI:[10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en](https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en).  
**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-18.

**Map version**: F3.1.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-19.

### Main references
* Clavero M, Hermoso, V (2011) *Reservoirs promote the taxonomic homogenization of fish communities within river basins*. **Biodiversity and Conservation** 20, 41-57. DOI: [10.1007/s10531-010-9945-3](http://doi.org/10.1007/s10531-010-9945-3)
* Lehner B, Liermann CR, Revenga C, Vörösmarty C, Fekete B, Crouzet P, Döll P, Endejan M, Frenken K, Magome J, Nilsson C  (2011) *High‐resolution mapping of the world's reservoirs and dams for sustainable river‐flow management*. **Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment** 9: 494-502. DOI: [10.1890/100125](http://doi.org/10.1890/100125)

### Map references
* Lehner B, Döll P  (2004) *Development and validation of a global database of lakes,reservoirs and wetlands*. **Journal of Hydrology** 296: 1–22.
