---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_3_1
content-id: T3.1
lang: en
title: T3.1 Seasonally dry tropical shrublands
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:06:47
---

SHORT DESCRIPTION IN PREPARATION

# Ecological Traits
 
These moderate-productivity, mostly evergreen shrublands, shrubby grasslands and low, open forests (generally <6-m tall) are limited by nutritional poverty and strong seasonal drought in the tropical winter months. Taxonomic and functional diversity is moderate in most groups but with high local endemism in plants, invertebrates, birds, and other taxa. Vegetation is spatially heterogeneous in a matrix of savannas ([T4.2](/explore/groups/T4.2)) or tropical dry forests ([T1.2](/explore/groups/T1.2)) and dominated by sclerophyllous shrubs with small leaf sizes (nanophyll-microphyll) and low SLA. C<sub>4</sub> grasses may be conspicuous or co-dominant (unlike in most temperate heathlands, [T3.2](/explore/groups/T3.2)) but generally do not form a continuous stratum as in savannas (T4). These systems have relatively simple trophic networks fuelled by autochthonous energy sources. Productivity is low to moderate and constrained by seasonal drought and nutritional poverty. Shrubs are the dominant primary producers and show traits promoting the capture and conservation of nutrients (<i>e.g.</i> sclerophylly, cluster roots, carnivorous structures, and microbial and fungal root mutualisms) and tolerance to severe seasonal droughts (<i>e.g.</i> stomatal invagination). Nectarivorous and/or insectivorous birds and reptiles and granivorous small mammals dominate the vertebrate fauna, but vertebrate herbivores are sparse. Recurring fires play a role in the top-down regulation of ecosystem structure and composition.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
A severe seasonal climatic water deficit during tropical winter months is exacerbated by sandy or shallow rocky substrates with low moisture retention. Nutritional poverty (especially N and P) stems from oligotrophic, typically acid substrates such as sandstones, ironstones, leached sand deposits, or rocky volcanic or ultramafic substrates. Vegetation holds the largest pool of nutrients. Temperatures are warm, rarely <10°C, with low diurnal and seasonal variation. Dry-season fires recur on decadal or longer time scales, but they are rare in table-top mountains (tepui).
 
# Distribution
 
Brazilian campos rupestres (where grasses are important), Venezuelan tepui, Peruvian tabletops, Florida sands, and scattered in northern Australia and montane oceanic islands.

MAP IN PREPARATION

## References

**Contributors**: DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31

### Main references
* Fernandes GW (2016) **Ecology and conservation of mountaintop grasslands in Brazil** Springer: Berlin.
* Morellato LPC, Silveira.FAO  (2018) *Plant life in campo rupestre: New lessons from an ancient biodiversity hotspot*. **Flora** 238: 1-10.
* Russell-Smith J, Ryan PG, Klessa D, Waight G, Harwood R  (1998) *Fire regimes, fire-sensitive vegetation, and fire management of the sandstone Arnhem Plateau, monsoonal northern Australia*. **Journal of Applied Ecology** 35, 829-846.



