---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_2_2
content-id: F2.2
lang: en
title: F2.2 Small permanent freshwater lakes
version: v2.0, 2020-05-24 18:33:50
---

SHORT DESCRIPTION IN PREPARATION

# Ecological Traits
 
Small permanent freshwater lakes, pools or ponds are lentic environments with relatively high perimeter-to-surface area and surface-area-to-volume ratios. Most are <1 km<sup>2</sup> in area, but this functional group includes lakes of transitional sizes up to 100 km<sup>2</sup>, while the largest lakes (>100 km<sup>2</sup>) are classified in [F2.1](/explore/groups/F2.1). Niche diversity increases with lake size. Although less diverse than larger lakes, these lakes may support phytoplankton, zooplankton, shallow-water macrophytes, invertebrates, sedentary and migratory fish, reptiles, waterbirds, and mammals. Primary productivity, dominated by cyanobacteria, algae, and macrophytes, arises from allochthonous and autochthonous energy sources, which vary with lake and catchment features, climate, and hydrological connectivity. Productivity can be highly seasonal, depending on climate, light, and nutrients. Permanent water and connectivity are critical to obligate freshwater biota, such as fish, invertebrates, and aquatic macrophytes. Trophic structure and complexity depend on lake size, depth, location, and connectivity. Littoral zones and benthic pathways are integral to overall production and trophic interactions. Shallow lakes tend to be more productive (by volume and area) than deep lakes because light penetrates to the bottom, establishing competition between benthic macrophytes and phytoplankton, more complex trophic networks and stronger top-down regulation leading to alternative stable states and possible regime shifts between them. Clear lakes in macrophyte-dominated states support higher biodiversity than phytoplankton-dominated eutrophic lakes.  Deep lakes are more dependent on planktonic primary production, which supports zooplankton, benthic microbial and invertebrate detritivores. Herbivorous fish and zooplankton regulate the main primary producers (biofilms and phytoplankton). The main predators are fish, macroinvertebrates, amphibians and birds, many of which have specialised feeding traits tied to different habitat niches (e.g. benthic or pelagic), but there are few filter-feeders. In many regions, shallow lakes provide critical breeding habitat for waterbirds, amphibians, and reptiles, while visiting mammals transfer nutrients, organic matter, and biota.
 
# Key Ecological Drivers
 
These lakes may be hydrologically isolated, groundwater-dependent or connected to rivers as terminal or flow-through systems. Nutrients depend on catchment size and substrates. Some lakes (e.g. on leached coastal sandplains or peaty landscapes) have dystrophic waters. The seasonality and amount of inflow, size, depth (mixing regime and light penetration), pH, nutrients, salinity, and tanins shape lake ecology and biota. Seasonal cycles of temperature, inflow and wind (which drives vertical mixing) may generate monomictic or dimictic temperature stratification regimes in deeper lakes, while shallow lakes are polymicitic, sometimes with short periods of multiple stratification. Seasonal factors such as light, increases in temperature, and flows into lakes can induce breeding and recruitment.
 
# Distribution
 
Mainly in humid temperate and tropical regions, rarely semi-arid or arid zones.

Major occurrences of small lakes was taken from the HydroLAKES database (Messager et al. 2016). Freshwater ecoregions containing minor occurrences of rivers and streams were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Abell et al. 2008), global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, and expertise of authors.

## References

**Contributors**: RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, LJ Jackson, F Essl and DA Keith.

**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-24

### Main references
* Schindler DE, Scheuerell MD  (2002) *Habitat coupling in lake ecosystems*. **Oikos** 98:177-189.
* Jeppesen E, Jensen JP, Søndergaard M, Lauridsen T, Pedersen LJ, Jensen L  (1997) *Top-down control in freshwater lakes: the role of nutrient state, submerged macrophytes and water depth*. **Shallow Lakes '95** pp.151–164. Developments in Hydrobiology, vol 119. Springer, Dordrecht. DOI: [10.1007/978-94-011-5648-6_17](http://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-5648-6_17)

### Map References
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P  (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*. **BioScience** 58: 403–414. [Data-set available on-line](http://www.feow.org). DOI: [10.1641/B580507](http://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Messager, M.L., Lehner, B., Grill, G., Nedeva, I., Schmitt, O.  (2016) *Estimating the volume and age of water stored in global lakes using a geo-statistical approach*. **Nature Communications** 13603. DOI: [10.1038/ncomms13603](http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13603)


