---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/f_1_6
content-id: F1.6
lang: en
title: F1.6 Episodic arid rivers
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

These desert rivers occur mostly in flat areas of arid and semi-arid mid-latitudes. Channels are typically broad, flat, and often branching, with soft sandy sediments. They are dry most of the time, but punctuated by high-volume, short duration flows that transport nutrients and stimulate high productivity by algae and zooplankton. Plants and animals can either tolerate or avoid long, dry periods and then exploit short pulses of abundant resources, producing hotspots of biodiversity and ecological activity in arid landscapes.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Episodic rivers have high temporal variability in flows and resource availability, shaping a low-diversity biota with periodically high abundance of some organisms. Productivity is episodically high and punctuated by longer periods of low productivity (i.e. boom-bust dynamics). The trophic structure can be complex and dominated by autochthonous primary production. Even though riparian vegetation is sparse, allochthonous inputs from connected floodplains may be important. Top-down control of ecosystem structure is evident in some desert streams. Episodic rivers are hotspots of biodiversity and ecological activity in arid landscapes, acting as both evolutionary and ecological refuges. Most biota have ruderal life cycles, dormancy phases, or high mobility enabling them to tolerate or avoid long, dry periods and to exploit short pulses of high resource availability during flooding. During dry periods, many organisms survive as dormant life phases (e.g. eggs or seeds), by reducing metabolism, or by persisting in perennial refugia (e.g. waterholes, shallow aquifers). They may rapidly recolonise the channel network during flow (networkers). Waterbirds survive dry phases by moving elsewhere, returning to breed during flows. The abundance of water, nutrients and food during flows and floods initiates rapid primary production (especially by algae), breeding and recruitment. Zooplankton are abundant in slower reaches during periods of flow. Macroinvertebrates such as sessile filter-feeders (e.g. mussels) and scavengers (e.g. crayfish) may occur in moderate flow environments with complex microhabitats in fine sediment and amongst woody debris. Assemblages of fish and amphibians are dominated by small body sizes. Most fish species use inundated floodplains in larval, juvenile and mature life stages, and produce massive biomass after large floods. Organisms generally tolerate wide ranges of temperature, salinity, and oxygen.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
These mostly lowland systems are distinguished by highly episodic flows and flood regimes that vary with catchment size and precipitation. High-volume, short duration flows (days to weeks, rarely months) punctuate long dry periods fill channels and flood wetlands. Low elevational gradients and shallow channels result in low turbulence and low to moderate flow velocity. Lowland stream channels are broad, flat, and often anastomising, with mostly soft sandy sediments. Groundwater is usually within rooting zones of perennial plants, which may establish in channels after flow events. Sediment loads drive periodically high turbidity. Locally or temporally important erosional processes have roles in geomorphic dynamism redistributing sediment in depositional features (e.g. braided channels and point bars). Upland streams are prone to erosive flash floods. High nutrient levels are due to large catchments and riparian inputs but depend on catchment geochemistry. These rivers often flow over naturally saline soils. Salinity can thus be high and increases in drying phases.
 
# Distribution
 
Arid and semi-arid mid-latitudes, in lowlands, and some uplands, but rarely above 1,500 m elevation.

Freshwater ecoregions (Abell _et al._ 2008) were identified as containing occurrences of these functional groups if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile. Within the selected ecoregions, remote sensing estimates of ephemeral surface water (classes 4, 5 and 8 from Pekel _et al._ 2016) were used to identify major occurrences. The remaining areas of selected ecoregions were mapped as minor occurrences.

## Citation

JL Nel, RT Kingsford, R Mac Nally, PS Giller, B Robson, AH Arthington and DA Keith. (2022). *F1.6 Episodic arid rivers*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: F1.6.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-12-14.

## References

### Main references
* Kingsford RT (2006) **Ecology of desert rivers** Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN [13 978-0-521-81825-4](www.cambridge.org/9780521818254).
* Sheldon et al. (2010) *Ecological roles and threats to aquatic refuges in arid landscapes: dryland river waterholes*. **Marine & Freshwater Research** 61, 885-895.

### Map references
* Abell R, Thieme ML, Revenga C, Bryer M, Kottelat M, Bogutskaya N, Coad B, Mandrak N, Contreras Balderas S, Bussing W, Stiassny MLJ, Skelton P, Allen GR, Unmack P, Naseka A, Ng R, Sindorf N, Robertson J, Armijo E, Higgins JV, Heibel TJ, Wikramanayake E, Olson D, López HL, Reis RE, Lundberg JG, Sabaj Pérez MH, Petry P  (2008) *Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation*. **BioScience** 58: 403–414. [Data-set](http://www.feow.org). DOI: [10.1641/B580507](http://doi.org/10.1641/B580507)
* Pekel JF, Cottam A, Gorelick N, Belward AS (2016) *High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes*. **Nature** 540, 418-422. DOI: [10.1038/nature20584](http://doi.org/10.1038/nature20584)
