---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/t_7_2
content-id: T7.2
lang: en
title: T7.2 Sown pastures and fields
version: 'v2.0, 2020-05-31 21:54:03'
---

In these intensively managed agricultural systems, grasses and legumes are sown and cultivated, with regular inputs of nutrients and (sometimes) water, primary for the mostly commercial production of livestock or food (hay) for livestock. Sown pastures are structurally simple ecosystems with low-diversity and high-productivity. They are dominated by one or few selected plant species as primary food sources for one animal species (usually large mammalian herbivores). Management includes chemical or physical treatments to exclude competitors, predators, herbivores, or pathogens. They differ from less intensively managed rangeland (e.g. [T5](/explore/biomes/T5)) and semi-natural grasslands ([T7.5](/explore/groups/T7.5)), where livestock graze in predominantly native ecosystems.

# Ecological Traits
 
Structurally simple, low-diversity, high-productivity pastures are maintained by the intensive anthropogenic supplementation of nutrients (more rarely water) and artificial disturbance regimes (e.g. periodic ploughing,), translocation (e.g. sowing and livestock movement), and harvesting of animals or plants. They are dominated by one or few selected plant species (C<sub>3</sub> and C<sub>4</sub> perennial pasture grasses and/or herbaceous legumes) and animal species (usually large mammalian herbivores) for commercial production of food or materials, ornamental displays, or, rarely, subsistence. Their composition and structure is maintained by the translocation and/or managed reproduction of target species and the periodic application of herbicides and pesticides and/or culling to exclude competitors, predators, herbivores, or pathogens. Consequently, these systems have low functional and taxonomic diversity and no local endemism. Target biota are genetically manipulated to promote rapid growth rates, efficient resource capture, enhanced resource allocation to production tissues, and tolerance to harsh environmental conditions, predators, and diseases. They are harvested by humans continuously or periodically for consumption. Major examples include intensively managed production pastures for livestock or forage (e.g. hay), lawns, and sporting fields. Livestock pastures may be rotated inter-annually with non-woody crops ([T7.1](/explore/groups/T7.1)). Target biota coexist with a cosmopolitan ruderal biota that exploits production landscapes through efficient dispersal, rapid establishment, high fecundity, and rapid population turnover. When the ecosystem is abandoned or managed less intensively, non-target biota become dominant and may form a steady, self-maintaining state or a transitional phase to novel ecosystems.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
High to moderate natural availability of water and nutrients is supplemented by human inputs via water management, landscape drainage modifications (e.g. surface earthworks), and/or fertiliser application. Intermittent flooding may occur where pastures replace palustrine wetlands. Temperatures are mild to warm, at least seasonally. Typically associated with moderately fertile substrates and flat to undulating terrain accessible by machinery. Artificial disturbance regimes (e.g. ploughing for up to 5 years/decade) maintain soil turnover, aeration, and nutrient release.
 
# Distribution
 
Mostly in subtropical to temperate climatic zones and developed countries across Europe, east and south Asia, subtropical and temperate Africa, southern Australasia, north and central America, and temperate south America.

We estimated the occurrence of sown pastures as areas with presence of pasture and ruminant livestock species (specifically cattle and sheep) but excluding areas of high overlap with croplands and areas with very high (e.g. industrial/urban areas) or very low intensity of human use (e.g. rangelands). We explored different layers and thresholds and made visual inspection of the output in Australia, South Asia, West Africa and North America. Major and minor occurrences reflect uncertainty in the thresholds used.

Presence of pasture was calculated from pasture area fraction (PAF>0), the overlap with croplands was calculated as the difference between pasture and cropland area fraction, both from Ramankutty _et al._ (2008). We used PAF-CAF>0 for major occurrence and PAF-CAF>-0.2 for minor occurrences. We used a dasymmetric estimate of livestock density for cattle and sheep with a minimum value fo 500 individuals per unit area (Gilbert _et al._ 2018). We used an estimate of Human Appropriation of Net Primary Production to approximate the intensity of human use (Haberl _et al._ 2007). We included areas with 100 < HANPP < 700 gC/m²/yr as major occurrences and areas with 80 < HANPP < 840 gC/m²/yr as minor occurrences.

## References

**Citation**: DA Keith and R Harper. (2020). *T7.2 Sown pastures and fields*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. DOI:[10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en](https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en).
**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-05-31.

**Map version**: T7.2.WM.nwx v1.0, updated 2021-07-20.

### Main references
* Bernués A, Ruiz R, Olaizola A, Villalba D, Casasús I  (2011) *Sustainability of pasture-based livestock farming systems in the European Mediterranean context: Synergies and trade-offs*. **Livestock Science** 139: 44–57.
* Spedding CRW  (1986) *Animal production from grass: A systems approach*. **Bioindustrial ecosystems** (Eds. DAJ Cole, GC Brander), pp 107-120. Ecosystems of the world vol. 21. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

### Map references
* Gilbert M, G Nicolas, G Cinardi, S Vanwambeke, TP Van Boeckel, GRW Wint, TP Robinson  (2018) *Global Distribution Data for Cattle, Buffaloes, Horses, Sheep, Goats, Pigs, Chickens and Ducks in 2010*. **Nature Scientific data** 5:180227. DOI: [10.1038/sdata.2018.227](http://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.227)
* Helmut Haberl, K. Heinz Erb, Fridolin Krausmann, Veronika Gaube, Alberte Bondeau, Christoph Plutzar, Simone Gingrich, Wolfgang Lucht, Marina Fischer-Kowalski (2007) *Quantifying and mapping the human appropriation of net primary production in earth's terrestrial ecosystems*. **Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences** 104 (31) 12942-12947. DOI: [10.1073/pnas.0704243104](http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0704243104)
* Ramankutty, N., A.T. Evan, C. Monfreda, and J.A. Foley (2008) *Farming the planet: 1. Geographic distribution of global agricultural lands in the year 2000*. **Global Biogeochemical Cycles** 22, GB1003. DOI: [10.1029/2007GB002952](http://doi.org/10.1029/2007GB002952)
