---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/groups/mt_3_1
content-id: MT3.1
lang: en
title: MT3.1 Artificial shorelines
version: 'v2.0, 2020-06-17 15:58:33'
---

Constructed sea walls, breakwaters, piers, docks, tidal canals, islands and other coastal infrastructure create habitat for marine plants and animals around ports, harbours, and other intensively settled coastal areas. The waters may be polluted by urban runoff or industrial outflows. Opportunities for introduction of invasive species e.g. through shipping mean that non-native species are common. Foodwebs are simple and dominated by species able to opportunistically colonise these structures through dispersal of eggs, larvae and spores.  Commonly, these include algae and bacteria, and filter-feeders like sea-squirts and barnacles.

# Ecological Traits
 
Constructed sea walls, breakwaters, piers, docks, tidal canals, islands and other coastal infrastructure create substrates inhabited by inter-tidal and subtidal, benthic and demersal marine biota around ports, harbours, and other intensively settled coastal areas. Structurally simple, spatially homogeneous substrates support a cosmopolitan biota, with no endemism and generally lower taxonomic and functional diversity than rocky shores ([MT1.1](/explore/groups/MT1.1)). Trophic networks are simple and dominated by filter-feeders (e.g. sea squirts and barnacles) and biofilms of benthic algae and bacteria. Low habitat heterogeneity and the small surface area for attachment that the often vertical substrate provides, regulate community structure by promoting competition and limiting specialised niches (e.g. crevices or pools) and restricting refuges from predators. Small planktivorous fish may dominate temperate harbours and ports. These can provide a trophic link, but overharvest of predatory fish and sharks may destabilise food webs and cause trophic cascades. Much of the biota possess traits that promote opportunistic colonisation, including highly dispersive life stages (e.g. larvae, eggs, and spores), high fecundity, generalist settlement niches and diet, wide ranges of salinity tolerance, and rapid population turnover. These structures typically contain a higher proportion of non-native species than the natural substrates they replace.

[DIAGRAM]

# Key Ecological Drivers
 
The substrate material influences the texture, chemistry, and thermal properties of the surface. Artificial structures of wood, concrete, rock, or steel have flat, uniform, and vertical surfaces that limit niche diversity and exacerbate inter-tidal gradients in desiccation and temperature. Floating structures have downward-facing surfaces, rare in nature. Some structures are ecologically engineered (designed for nature) to provide more complex surfaces and ponds to enhance biodiversity and ecosystem function. Structures may be located in high (i.e. breakwaters) or low (i.e. harbours) energy waters. Tides and waves are key drivers of onshore resource and kinetic energy gradients. Brackish water plumes from polluted storm water and sewage overflows add allochthonous nutrients, organic carbon, and open ecological space exploited by invasive species introduced by shipping and ballast water. The structures are often located close to vectors for invasive species (e.g. transport hubs). Boat traffic and storm water outflows cause erosion and bank instability and maintain high turbidity in the water column. This limits photosynthesis by primary producers, but nutrient run-off may increase planktonic productivity. Maintenance regimes (e.g. scraping) reduce biomass and reset succession.
 
# Distribution
 
Urbanised coasts through tropical and temperate latitudes, especially in North and Central America, Europe, and North and South Asia.

Marine ecoregions (Spalding _et al._ 2008) containing major and minor occurrences of urbanized shorelines were identified from the map of night lights (see [T7.4](/explore/groups/T7.4)), imagery available on Google Earth and expertise of authors. Occurrences were aggregated to 1 degree spatial resolution and intersected with the coastline to exclude areas inland and in the open ocean.

## References

**Citation**: IM Suthers, MJ Bishop, LB Firth and KA Dafforn. DA Keith. (2020). *MT3.1 Artificial shorelines*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. and Kingsford, R.T. (eds.) (2020). **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. DOI:[10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en](https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en).  
**Content version**: v2.0, updated 2020-06-17.

**Map version**: MT3.1.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

### Main references
* Dafforn KA, Glasby TM, Airoldi L, Rivero NK, Mayer-Pinto M, Johnston EL  (2015) *Marine urbanization: an ecological framework for designing multifunctional artificial structures*. **Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment** . DOI: [10.1890/140050](http://doi.org/10.1890/140050)

### Map references
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J  (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI: [10.1641/B570707](http://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
