---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/biomes/tf_1
content-id: TF1
lang: en
title: TF1. Palustrine wetlands biome
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 16:59:11
---

At the interface of terrestrial and freshwater realms, the Palustrine wetlands biome includes vegetated floodplains, groundwater seeps, and mires with permanent or intermittent surface water. Although water and light are abundant at least periodically, saturation of the soil may result in oxygen deprivation below the ground. This suppresses microbial activity and, in many systems, production exceeds decomposition, resulting in peat accumulation. 

The water regime influences resource availability and productivity and thus regulates these ecosystems from the bottom-up. Interactions among catchment precipitation, local evapotranspiration, and substrate and surface morphology regulate run-on, run-off, infiltration, and percolation. This results in water regimes that vary from permanent shallow standing water or near-surface water tables to seasonally high water tables to episodic inundation with long inter-annual dry phases. 

As a consequence of their indirect relationships with climate, wetland biomes are traditionally classified as ‘azonal’. Spatial heterogeneity is a key feature of palustrine wetlands. At landscape scales, they function as resource sinks and refuges with substantially higher productivity than the surrounding matrix. Fine-scale spatial variation in the water regime often produces restricted hydrological niches and intricate mosaics of patch types with contrasting structure and biotic composition. 

Autotrophs dominate complex trophic webs. Amphibious macrophytes are the dominant autotrophs, although epibenthic algae are important in some systems. Amphibious plants have specialised traits enabling growth and survival in low-oxygen substrates and often engineer habitats for heterotrophs. Microbial decomposers and invertebrate detritivores are most abundant in surface soils. A range of microscopic and macroinvertebrates with sedentary adult phases (e.g. crustaceans) have obligate associations with Palustrine wetlands, which also provide important foraging and breeding sites for macroinvertebrate and vertebrate herbivores and predators that disperse more widely across the landscape, including waterbirds
