---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/fm_1_2
content-id: FM1.2
lang: es
title: FM1.2 Permanently open riverine estuaries and bays
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

These coastal ecosystems are shifting mosaics of different habitats, depending on the shape of the local coast, and proportional inflow of freshwater and seawater. Combined nutrients from marine, freshwater and land-based sources support very high productivity. Transient large animals like dugongs, dolphins, turtles and shorebirds feed on abundant fish, invertebrates and plant life, and they commonly serve as sheltered nursery areas for fish. Many organisms are adapted to large variations in salinity.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These coastal water bodies are mosaic systems characterised by high spatial and temporal variabilities in structure and function, which depend on coastal geomorphology, ratios of freshwater inflows to marine waters and tidal volume (hence residence time of saline water), and seasonality of climate. Fringing shoreline systems may include intertidal mangroves ([MFT1.2](/explore/groups/MFT1.2)), saltmarshes and reedbeds ([MFT1.3](/explore/groups/MFT1.3)), rocky ([MT1.1](/explore/groups/MT1.1)), muddy ([MT1.2](/explore/groups/MT1.2)) or sandy shores ([MT1.3](/explore/groups/MT1.3)), while seagrasses and macrophytes ([M1.1](/explore/groups/M1.1)), shellfish beds ([M1.4](/explore/groups/M1.4)) or subtidal rocky reefs ([M1.6](/explore/groups/M1.6)) may occur in shallow intertidal and subtidal areas. Water-column productivity is typically higher than in nearby marine or freshwater systems due to substantial allochthonous energy and nutrient subsidies from shoreline vegetation and riverine and marine sources. This high productivity supports a complex trophic network with relatively high mosaic-level diversity and an abundance of aquatic organisms. Planktonic and benthic invertebrates (e.g. molluscs and crustaceans) often sustain large fish populations, with fish nursery grounds being a common feature. Waterbirds (e.g. cormorants), seabirds (e.g. gannets), top-order predatory fish, mammals (e.g. dolphins and dugongs), and reptiles (e.g. marine turtles and crocodilians) exploit these locally abundant food sources. Many of these organisms in upper trophic levels are highly mobile and move among different estuaries through connected ocean waters or by flying. Others migrate between different ecosystem types to complete their various life-history phases, although some may remain resident for long periods. Most biota tolerate a broad range of salinity or are spatially structured by gradients. The complex spatial mixes of physical and chemical characteristics, alongside seasonal, inter-annual, and sporadic variability in aquatic conditions, induce correspondingly large spatial-temporal variability in food webs. Low-salinity plumes, usually proportional to river size and discharge, may extend far from the shore, producing tongues of ecologically distinct conditions into the marine environment.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Characteristics of these coastal systems are governed by the relative dominance of saline marine waters versus freshwater inflows (groundwater and riverine), the latter depending on the seasonality of precipitation and evaporative stress. Geomorphology ranges from wave-dominated estuaries to drowned river valleys, tiny inlets, and enormous bays. These forms determine the residence time, proportion, and distribution of saline waters, which in turn affect salinity and thermal gradients and stratification, dissolved O2 concentration, nutrients, and turbidity. The water column is closely linked to mudflats and sandflats, in which an array of biogeochemical processes occurs, including denitrification and N-fixation, and nutrient cycling.
 
# Distribution
 
Coastlines of most landmasses but rarely on arid or polar coasts.

Marine ecoregions (Spalding _et al._ 2008) containing major or minor occurrences of each ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting global and regional reviews, maps of relevant ecosystems, imagery available in Google Earth and expertise of authors. Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution and clipped to a 20 km buffer along the coastline to exlcude inland and offshore areas of the ecoregions.

## Citation

R Mac Nally, R Kingsford, MJ Bishop, RJ Woodland, KA Dafforn and DA Keith. (2022). *FM1.2 Permanently open riverine estuaries and bays*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: FM1.2.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-10-19.

## References

### Main references
* Gillanders BM  (2007) *Linking terrestrial-freshwater and marine environments: an example from estuarine systems*. **Marine ecology** (Eds. Connell, SD and Gillanders, BM). Chapter 11. Oxford University Press, Melbourne. ISBN [978-0-19-555302-4](https://trove.nla.gov.au/work/25222131).

### Map references
* Spalding MD, Fox HE, Allen GR, Davidson N, Ferdaña ZA, Finlayson M, Halpern BS, Jorge MA, Lombana A, Lourie SA, Martin KD, McManus E, Molnar J, Recchia CA, Robertson J  (2007) *Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas*. **Bioscience** 57: 573–583. DOI: [10.1641/B570707](http://doi.org/10.1641/B570707)
