---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/mt_2_2
content-id: MT2.2
lang: es
title: MT2.2 Large seabird and pinniped colonies
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Large concentrations of roosting or nesting seabirds and semiaquatic mammals such as seals and walrus are found on relatively isolated islands and shores. These animals consume large amounts of marine resources but spend many weeks and months on land, accumulating high concentrations of nitrogen, phosphorous and other nutrients. The abundance and relatively large body size of individuals disrupt the growth of vegetation. The combination of these factors means that microbial activity is high and soil invertebrates are abundant, but plant diversity is usually low, and land based grazers and predators are usually absent.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Large seabird and pinniped colonies are localised eutrophic terrestrial ecosystems near the ocean interface that receive massive nutrient subsidies from large concentrations of roosting or nesting seabirds and pinnipeds that function as mobile links between land and sea. The marine-derived subsidies and potentially massive physical disturbance to vegetation and soils distinguish these colonies from otherwise similar ecosystems in [MT2.1](/explore/groups/MT2.1). Subsidies are greatest where seabird body size is typically larger (e.g. penguins) and breeding seasons are longer, particularly the sub-Antarctic and Antarctic. The waters around these ecosystems may be locally depleted in seabird prey due to prolonged predation.  Colonies occupy diverse habitats, from sandy shores to rocky islands and montane forests, with vegetation composition and structure limited by physical disturbance, nutrient input, salt influx and gradient (e.g., sea spray), water deficit, surface and subsurface bioturbation-driven changes in soil condition and pH, avian seed dispersal, unstable substrates, and high exposure, often exhibiting salt tolerance and clonal reproduction. Plant assemblages exist across a gradient, influenced by seabird/pinniped disturbance, nutrient input and climate, whereby high-density colonies can completely suppress plant growth, but where disturbance and nutrient load is lower, vegetation can establish, typically in low richness but high abundance. Trophic networks are characterized high microbial activity and abundant invertebrates in soils which can lead to localised biodiversity hotspots, in contrast to the low richness of plant communities under high nutrient loading. There are typically low densities or a total absence of terrestrial mammalian predators and grazers (limited by dispersal barriers). Vibrant and specialised lichens can be abundant. Plant dispersal linked to bird migration, and nutrient transport between marine foraging areas and terrestrial breeding areas, may occur over long distances.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Marine subsidies of nutrients, excreted by marine-foraging seabirds and pinnipeds, drives eutrophication, resulting in the highest terrestrial concentrations of nitrogen, phosphorus, and other nutrients on Earth’s surface. Nutrients may be derived from sources proximal to, or remote from the colony, and may be continual or pulsed, depending on the colony location, size, constituent species, and seasonal variation in attendance. Substrates vary from sand to soil to rock to ice, and desiccating winds add aerosol salts and limit water availability in coastal colonies. Temperatures vary from warm to mild in tropical/temperate/boreal latitudes to freezing in polar regions. Bioturbation, coastal storms, and unstable substrates influence biotic interactions and colony abundance and distribution.
 
# Distribution
 
Scattered globally on islands and coastlines, but most common in polar and subpolar regions

We used spatial data on Nitrogen (N) and Phosphor (P) deposition from seabird colonies (Otero _et al._ 2018) as an indicators of the distribution of this functional group. Original point data was in decimal degrees rounded to 6 arc-min resolution, for the maps we aggregated data to square grid cells of 250 km. We used a threshold of >1000 and <100000 kg/yr N to select minor occurrences and a threshold of >100000 kg/yr N for major occurrences.

## Citation

SBZ Gorta, SF Bokhorst, JC. Ellis and DA Keith. (2022). *MT2.2 Large seabird and pinniped colonies*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: MT2.2.IM.orig v1.0, updated 2021-09-15.

## References

### Main references
* Ellis JC (2005) *Marine Birds on land: A review of plant biomass, species richness, and community composition in seabird colonies*. **Plant Ecology** 181, 227–241.
* Otero XL, De La Peña-Lastra S,  Pérez-Alberti A, Ferreira TO, Huerta-Diaz MA (2018) *Seabird colonies as important global drivers in the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles*. **Nature Communications** 9, 246.
* S. N. Riddick, U. Dragosits, T. D. Blackall, F. Daunt, S. Wanless and M. A. Sutton (2012) *The global distribution of ammonia emissions from seabird colonies*. **Atmospheric Environment** 55 (2012), pp. 319-327. DOI: [10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.02.052](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.02.052)

### Map references
* Otero XL, De La Peña-Lastra S,  Pérez-Alberti A, Ferreira TO, Huerta-Diaz MA (2018) *Seabird colonies as important global drivers in the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles*. **Nature Communications** 9, 246.
