---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/m_1_7
content-id: M1.7
lang: es
title: M1.7 Subtidal sand beds
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

These relatively unstable shelf ecosystems in turbulent waters support moderately diverse communities made up largely of consumers, like invertebrate detritivores and filter-feeders, including burrowing polychaetes, crustaceans, echinoderms, and molluscs. Filter feeders are most common in higher energy areas of currents and wave action. Primary producers are limited by substrate instability or light, with seagrass ecosystems ([M1.1](/explore/groups/M1.1)) occurring where these factors are not limiting to plant establishment and persistence. Low structural habitat complexity means a lack of shelter, and many organisms display predator avoidance traits like burrowing, shells or camouflage (e.g. sole).

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Medium to coarse-grained, unvegetated, and soft minerogenic sediments show moderate levels of biological diversity. The trophic network is dominated by consumers with very few _in situ_ primary producers. Interstitial microalgae and planktonic algae are present, but larger benthic primary producers are limited either by substrate instability or light, which diminishes with depth. In shallow waters where light is abundant and soft substrates are relatively stable, this group of systems is replaced by group [M1.1](/explore/groups/M1.1), which is dominated by vascular marine plants. In contrast to those autochthonous systems, Subtidal sand beds rely primarily on allochthonous energy, with currents generating strong bottom flows and a horizontal flux of food. Sandy substrates tend to have less organic matter content and lower microbial diversity and abundance than muddy substrates ([M1.8](/explore/groups/M1.8)). Soft sediments may be dominated by invertebrate detritivores and suspension-feeders including burrowing polychaetes, crustaceans, echinoderms, and molluscs. Suspension-feeders tend to be most abundant in high-energy environments where waves and currents move sandy sediments, detritus, and living organisms. The homogeneity and low structural complexity of the substrate exposes potential prey to predation, especially from pelagic fish. Large bioturbators such as dugongs, stingrays and whales may also be important predators. Consequently, many benthic animals possess specialised traits that enable other means of predator avoidance, such as burrowing, shells, or camouflage.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
The substrate is soft, minerogenic, low in organic matter, relatively homogeneous, structurally simple, and mobile. The pelagic waters are moderate to high-energy environments, with waves and currents promoting substrate instability. Nonetheless, depositional processes dominate over erosion, leading to net sediment accumulation. Fluvial inputs from land and the erosion of headlands and sea cliffs contribute sediment, nutrients, and organic matter, although significant lateral movement is usually driven by longshore currents. Light availability diminishes with depth. Mixing is promoted by waves and currents, ensuring low temporal variability in salinity, which averages 3.5%.
 
# Distribution
 
Globally widespread around continental and island shelves.

These are ecosystem functional groups that are widespread through the global extent of the marine shelf biome. Reliable data on their precise distribution are limited. To represent regional uncertainty, their indicative distributions were mapped in as minor occurrences through the full extent of the marine ‘shelf’ base layer as mapped by Harris _et al._ (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## Citation

BA Polidoro, SE Swearer and DA Keith. (2022). *M1.7 Subtidal sand beds*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: M1.7.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

## References

### Main references
* Byers JE, Grabowski JH  (2014) *Soft-sediment communities*. **Marine community ecology and conservation** (Eds. MD Bertness, JF Bruno, BR Silliman, JJ Stachowicz), pp227-249. Sinauer, Sunderland.
* Snelgrove PVR  (1999) *Getting to the bottom of marine biodiversity: sedimentary habitats*. **Bioscience** 49: 129-138. DOI: [10.2307/1313538](http://doi.org/10.2307/1313538)

### Map references
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK  (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. DOI: [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
