---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/m_3_1
content-id: M3.1
lang: es
title: M3.1 Continental and island slopes
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

These lightless slopes of sand, mud and rocky outrops run down from the shallower shelf break to the very deep abyssal basins. Nutrients falling from upper ocean layers and delivered by currents from the shelf support diverse communities of microbial decomposers, detritivores like crabs and demersal fish, and their predators, but sessile animals are rare and algae are absent. Biomass is relatively low and peaks at mid-slope, diminishing with depth as food and temperature decrease and bathymetric pressure increases.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These aphotic heterotrophic ecosystems fringe the margins of continental plates and islands, extending from the shelf break (~250 m depth) to the abyssal basins (4,000 m). These large sedimentary slopes with localised rocky outcrops are characterised by strong depth gradients in the biota and may be juxtaposed with specialised ecosystems such as submarine canyons ([M3.2](/explore/groups/M3.2)), deep-water biogenic systems ([M3.6](/explore/groups/M3.6)), and chemosynthetic seeps ([M3.7](/explore/groups/M3.7)), as well as landslides and oxygen-minimum zones. Energy sources are derived mostly from lateral advection from the shelf and vertical fallout of organic matter particles through the water column and pelagic fauna impinging on the slopes, which varies seasonally with the productivity of the euphotic layers. Other inputs of organic matter include sporadic pulses of large falls (e.g. whale falls and wood falls). Photoautotrophs and resident herbivores are absent and the trophic network is dominated by microbial decomposers, detritivores, and their predators. Depth-related gradients result in a marked bathymetric zonation of faunal communities, and there is significant basin-scale endemism in many taxa. The taxonomic diversity of these heterotrophs is high and reaches a maximum at middle to lower depths. The biomass of megafauna decreases with depth and the meio-fauna and macro-fauna become relatively more important, but maximum biomass occurs on mid-slopes in some regions. The megafauna is often characterised by sparse populations of detritivores, including echinoderms, crustaceans, and demersal fish, but sessile benthic organisms are scarce and the bottom is typically bare, unconsolidated sediments.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
The continental slopes are characterised by strong environmental depth gradients in pressure, temperature, light, and food. Limited sunlight penetration permits some visual predation but no photosynthesis below 250 m and rapidly diminishes with depth, with total darkness (excluding bioluminescence) below 1,000 m. Hydrostatic pressure increases with depth (1 atmosphere every 10 m). Temperature drastically shifts below the thermocline from warmer surface waters to cold, deep water (1–3°C), except in the Mediterranean Sea (13°C) and the Red Sea (21°C). Food quantity and quality decrease with increasing depth, as heterotrophic zooplankton efficiently use the labile compounds of the descending particulate organic matter. Sediments on continental slopes provide important ecosystem services, including nutrient regeneration and carbon sequestration.
 
# Distribution
 
Fringing the margins of all ocean basins and oceanic islands. Extending beneath 11% of the ocean surface at depths of 250–4,000 m.

Major occurrences of continental and island slopes was based on the ‘slope’ geomorphic unit of Harris _et al._ (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## Citation

E Ramirez-Llodra, UC Fernandez-Arcaya, IG Priede and DA Keith. (2022). *M3.1 Continental and island slopes*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: M3.1.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-21.

## References

### Main references
* Menot L, Sibuet M, Carney RS, Levin LA, Rowe GT, Billett DSM et al.  (2010) *New perceptions of continental margin biodiversity*. **Life in the world’s oceans: diversity, distribution and abundance** Chapter 5, pp 79-101. Blackwell, Chichester.. DOI: [10.1002/9781444325508.ch5](http://doi.org/10.1002/9781444325508.ch5)

### Map references
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK  (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. DOI: [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
