---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/t_1_4
content-id: T1.4
lang: es
title: T1.4 Tropical heath forests
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

These structurally unique forests are restricted to less fertile soils on acidic sandy substrates best known in Amazonia and Southeast Asia. They are characterised by high densities of low, slender trees that allow light penetration to an open forest floor covered with mosses. They have low productivity compared to other tropical forests, with a limited diversity of plants and animals forming a simple foodweb, including amphibians and reptiles.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Structurally simple evergreen forests with high densities of thin stems, closed to open uniform canopies, typically 5–20 m tall and uniform with a moderate to high LAI. Productivity is lower than in other tropical forests, weakly seasonal and limited by nutrient availability and in some cases by soil anoxia, but decomposition is rapid. Plant traits such as insectivory, N-fixing microbial associations and ant mutualisms are well represented, suggesting adaptive responses to nitrogen deficiency. Plant insectivory aside, trophic networks are simple compared to other tropical forests. Diversity of plant and animal taxa is also relatively low, but dominance and endemism are proportionately high. Tree foliage is characterised by small (microphyll-notophyll) leaves with lower SLA than other tropical forests. Leaves are leathery and often ascending vertically, enabling more light penetration to ground level than in other tropical forests. Tree stems are slender (generally <20 cm in diameter), sometimes twisted, and often densely packed and without buttresses. Epiphytes are usually abundant but lianas are rare and ground vegetation is sparse, with the forest floor dominated by insectivorous vascular plants and bryophytes.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
These forests experience an overall water surplus, but productivity is limited by deep sandy low-nutrient acidic substrates, which are leached by high rainfall. Acidity promotes high Al levels that inhibit root growth. Most nutrients are retained in vegetation. Downward movement of clay and organic particles through the soil profile results in a deep, white sandy horizon capped by a thin grey surface horizon (typical of podzols), limiting the capacity of the soil to retain nutrients (especially nitrogen) and moisture within the shallow rooting zone. Hence they are prone to inter-annual droughts, but waterlogging may occur where the water table is close to the surface, resulting in periodic anoxia within the root zone. Landscape water-table gradients result in surface mosaics in which heath forests may be juxtaposed with more waterlogged peat forests ([TF1.1](/explore/groups/TF1.1)) and palustrine wetland systems ([TF1.2](/explore/groups/TF1.2)).
 
# Distribution
 
Scattered through northwest and west Amazonia, possibly Guiana, and Southeast Asia, notably in the Rio Negro catchment and southern Kalimantan. Poorly known in Africa, but possibly in the Gabon region.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## Citation

DA Keith, RT Young and A Etter. (2022). *T1.4 Tropical heath forests*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: T1.4.web.orig v2.0, updated 2020-10-20.

## References

### Main references
* Adeney JM, Christensen NL, Vicentini A, Cohn-Haft M  (2016) *White-sand ecosystems in Amazonia*. **Biotropica** . DOI: [10.1111/btp.12293](http://doi.org/10.1111/btp.12293)
* Ashton PS, Seidler R (2014) **On the forests of tropical Asia: lest the memory fade** Kew Publishing: Kew.
* Fortunel C, Paine CET; Fine PVA, J. B. Kraft NJB, Baraloto C  (2014) *Environmental factors predict community functional composition in Amazonian forests*. **Journal of Ecology** . DOI: [10.1111/1365-2745.12160](http://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2745.12160)
* Miyamoto K, Rahajoe JS, Kohyama T  (2007) *Forest structure and primary productivity in a Bornean heath forest*. **Biotropica** . DOI: [10.1111/j.1744-7429.2006.00231.x](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-7429.2006.00231.x)
* Miyamoto K, Wagai R, Aiba S, Nilus R (2016) *Variation in aboveground stand structure and fine-root biomass of Bornean heath (kerangas) forests in relation to altitude and soil nitrogen availability*. **Trees-Structure and Function** 30, 385-394.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
