---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/t_7_2
content-id: T7.2
lang: es
title: T7.2 Sown pastures and fields
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

In these intensively managed agricultural systems, grasses and legumes are sown and cultivated, with regular inputs of nutrients and (sometimes) water, primary for the mostly commercial production of livestock or food (hay) for livestock. Sown pastures are structurally simple ecosystems with low-diversity and high-productivity. They are dominated by one or few selected plant species as primary food sources for one animal species (usually large mammalian herbivores). Management includes chemical or physical treatments to exclude competitors, predators, herbivores, or pathogens. They differ from less intensively managed rangeland (e.g. [T5](/explore/biomes/T5)) and semi-natural grasslands ([T7.5](/explore/groups/T7.5)), where livestock graze in predominantly native ecosystems.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Structurally simple, high-productivity pastures are maintained by the intensive anthropogenic supplementation of nutrients (more rarely water) and artificial disturbance regimes (e.g. periodic ploughing,), translocation (e.g. livestock movement and sowing), and harvesting of animals or plants. The magnitude of these inputs distinguish these systems from semi-natural pastures and rangelands in biomes [T4](/explore/biomes/T4) and [T5](/explore/biomes/T5) used for less intense livestock production. They are dominated by one or few selected plant species (C<sub>3</sub> and C<sub>4</sub> perennial pasture grasses and/or herbaceous legumes) and animal species (usually large mammalian herbivores) for commercial production of food or materials, ornamental displays, or sometimes subsistence. Their composition and structure is maintained by the translocation and/or managed reproduction of target species and the periodic application of herbicides and pesticides and/or culling to exclude competitors, predators, herbivores, or pathogens. Consequently, compared to ‘natural’ rangeland systems and semi-natural pastures, these systems have low functional and taxonomic diversity and little or no local endemism. Target biota are genetically manipulated to promote rapid growth rates, efficient resource capture, enhanced resource allocation to production tissues, and tolerance to harsh environmental conditions, diseases, and predators, . They are harvested by humans continuously or periodically for consumption or maintenance. Typically, at least 40% of net primary productivity is appropriated by humans. Major examples include intensively managed production pastures for livestock or forage (e.g. hay). Livestock pastures may be rotated inter-annually with non-woody crops ([T7.1](/explore/groups/T7.1)), or they may be managed as mixed silvo-pastoral systems ([T7.3](/explore/groups/T7.3)). Target biota coexist with native and cosmopolitan ruderal biota that exploits production landscapes through efficient dispersal, rapid establishment, high fecundity, and rapid population turnover. When the ecosystem is abandoned or managed less intensively, non-target biota become dominant and may form a steady, self-maintaining state or a transitional phase to novel ecosystems.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
High to moderate natural availability of water and nutrients is typically supplemented by human inputs via water management, landscape drainage modifications (e.g. surface earthworks), and/or fertiliser application at varied rates. Intermittent flooding may occur where pastures replace palustrine wetlands. Temperatures are mild to warm, at least seasonally. Typically associated with moderately fertile substrates and flat to undulating terrain accessible by machinery. Artificial disturbance regimes (e.g. ploughing for up to 5 years/decade) maintain soil turnover, aeration, and nutrient release.
 
# Distribution
 
Mostly in tropical to temperate climatic zones and developed countries across Europe, east and south Asia, subtropical and temperate Africa, southern Australasia, north and central America, and temperate south America. See map caveats (Table [S4.1](/explore/groups/S4.1))

Mapping of intensive livestock pastures was based on fractional land use mapping (Ramankutty _et al._ 2008), dasymetric estimates of ruminant livestock density for cattle and sheep (Gilbert _et al._ 2010), and Human Appropriation of Net Primary Production (HANPP, Haberl _et al._ 2007). Fractional land use cover indicated firstly where pastures occur and secondly where they occupy a large portion of area relative to croplands. This helped to exclude intensive croplands that are also used to graze livestock, either through temporal rotation or on the margins of cropped paddocks (e.g. in south Asia). Livestock densities indicated where ruminants were important components of pasture systems, and helped exclude some rangelands with low livestock densities. Finally, HANPP helped exclude low productivity rangelands with high stocking rates and additional areas of cropland. We explored different combinations and thresholds for the input data layers, visually inspecting the output in South Asia, Australia, West Africa, and North and South America. We then mapped major occurrences where pasture area fraction greater than zero (PAF>0) and greater than cropland area fraction (PAF-CAF>0), densities of cattle or sheep were greater than 500 per cell, and 100 < HANPP < 700 gC/m²/yr. We examined the sensitivity of mapped area to variation in these thresholds and found no appreciatble change in the global mapped area when livestock density was varied by ±20% and marginal change in mapped area with variation in the other thresholds by the same amount. To represent this uncertainty, we mapped minor occurrences as the additional area where PAF>0, PAF-CAP>-0.2 and 80 < HANPP < 840 gC/m²/yr. We acknowledge significant untested assumptions and limitations on spatial predictors that challenge the global-scale delineation of pasture ecosystems with varied levels of human influence. We therefore advise appropriate caution in use of the spatial data for quantitative analysis.

## Citation

DA Keith and R Harper. (2022). *T7.2 Sown pastures and fields*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: T7.2.WM.nwx v1.0, updated 2021-11-19.

## References

### Main references
* Bernués A, Ruiz R, Olaizola A, Villalba D, Casasús I  (2011) *Sustainability of pasture-based livestock farming systems in the European Mediterranean context: Synergies and trade-offs*. **Livestock Science** 139: 44–57.
* Spedding CRW  (1986) *Animal production from grass: A systems approach*. **Bioindustrial ecosystems** (Eds. DAJ Cole, GC Brander), pp 107-120. Ecosystems of the world vol. 21. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

### Map references
* Gilbert M, G Nicolas, G Cinardi, S Vanwambeke, TP Van Boeckel, GRW Wint, TP Robinson  (2018) *Global Distribution Data for Cattle, Buffaloes, Horses, Sheep, Goats, Pigs, Chickens and Ducks in 2010*. **Nature Scientific data** 5:180227. DOI: [10.1038/sdata.2018.227](http://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.227)
* Helmut Haberl, K. Heinz Erb, Fridolin Krausmann, Veronika Gaube, Alberte Bondeau, Christoph Plutzar, Simone Gingrich, Wolfgang Lucht, Marina Fischer-Kowalski (2007) *Quantifying and mapping the human appropriation of net primary production in earth's terrestrial ecosystems*. **Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences** 104 (31) 12942-12947. DOI: [10.1073/pnas.0704243104](http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0704243104)
* Ramankutty, N., A.T. Evan, C. Monfreda, and J.A. Foley (2008) *Farming the planet: 1. Geographic distribution of global agricultural lands in the year 2000*. **Global Biogeochemical Cycles** 22, GB1003. DOI: [10.1029/2007GB002952](http://doi.org/10.1029/2007GB002952)
