---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/mt_1_2
content-id: MT1.2
lang: es
title: MT1.2 Muddy Shorelines
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Mudflats occur on low-energy coastlines. Mud and silt, often from nearby rivers, protect the burrowing organisms living in these ecosystems from common shoreline stressors (e.g. high temperatures and desiccation) and predatory shorebirds, crabs and fish. These shorelines are critical stopovers and foraging grounds for migratory shorebirds. Primary productivity is mostly from diatoms (single-celled algae) that rely on tides. Oxygen can be low where sediments are very fine or burrowing or other disturbance is limited.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Highly productive intertidal environments are defined by their fine particle size (dominated by silts) and are fuelled largely by allochthonous production. Benthic diatoms are the key primary producer, although ephemeral intertidal seagrass may occur. Otherwise, macrophytes are generally absent unlike other ecosystems on intertidal mudflats ([MFT1.2](/explore/groups/MFT1.2), [MFT1.3](/explore/groups/MFT1.3)). Fauna are dominated by deposit-feeding taxa (consuming organic matter that accumulates in the fine-grained sediments) and detritivores feeding on wrack (i.e. drift algae deposited at the high-water mark) and other sources of macro-detritus. Bioturbating and tube-dwelling taxa are key ecosystem engineers, the former oxygenating and mixing the sediments and the latter providing structure to an otherwise sedimentary habitat. Infauna residing within sediments are protected from high temperatures and desiccation by the surrounding matrix and do not display the same marked patterns of zonation as rocky intertidal communities. Many infaunal taxa are soft-bodied. Nevertheless, competition for food resources carried by incoming tides can lead to intertidal gradients in fauna. Predators include the substantial shorebird populations that forage on infauna at low tide, including migratory species that depend on these systems as stopover sites. Fish, rays, crabs, and resident whelks forage around lugworm bioturbation. Transitions to mangrove ([MFT1.2](/explore/groups/MFT1.2)), saltmarsh or reedbed ([MFT1.3](/explore/groups/MFT1.3)) ecosystems may occur in response to isostatic or sea level changes, freshwater inputs or changes in currents that promote macrophyte colonisation.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
These are depositional environments influenced by sediment supply and the balance of erosion and sedimentation. They occur on lower wave energy coastlines with lower slopes and larger intertidal ranges than sandy shorelines, resulting in lower levels of sediment transport and oxygenation by physical processes. In the absence of burrowing taxa, sediments may display low rates of turnover, which may result in an anoxic zone close to the sediment surface. Small particle sizes limit interstitial spaces, further reducing aeration. The depth of the anoxic zone can be a key structuring factor. In contrast to sandy shorelines, they are organically rich and consequently higher in nutrients. Generally, muddy shorelines are formed from sediments supplied by nearby rivers, often remobilised from the seafloor throughout the tidal cycle.
 
# Distribution
 
Muddy shorelines occur along low-energy coastlines, in estuaries and embayments where the velocity of water is so low that the finest particles can settle to the bottom.

The indicative map of muddy shorelines was developed by resampling the 2016 area of tidal flats mapped by Murray _et al._ (2019) at two resolutions. A broad grid cell (5 arc minute resolution) is used to show the overall range of tidal flats, and large aggregations are depicted as major occurrences (30 arc second grids or approx. 1km<sup>2</sup>).

## Citation

MJ Bishop, NJ Murray, SE Swearer and DA Keith. (2022). *MT1.2 Muddy Shorelines*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: MT1.2.web.map v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

## References

### Main references
* Murray NJ, Phinn SR, DeWitt M, Ferrari R, Johnston R, Lyons MB, Clinton N, Thau D, Fuller RA  (2019) *The global distribution and trajectory of tidal flats*. **Nature** 565: 222–225. DOI: [10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8)
* Peterson CH  (1991) *Intertidal zonation of marine invertebrates in sand and mud*. **American Scientist** 79:236-249. [URL](http://www.jstor.org/stable/29774371).
* Wilson WH  (1990) *Competition and predation in marine soft-sediment communities*. **Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics** . DOI: [10.1146/annurev.es.21.110190.001253](http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.21.110190.001253)

### Map references
* Murray NJ, Phinn SR, DeWitt M, Ferrari R, Johnston R, Lyons MB, Clinton N, Thau D, Fuller RA  (2019) *The global distribution and trajectory of tidal flats*. **Nature** 565: 222–225. DOI: [10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0805-8)
