---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/t_7_4
content-id: T7.4
lang: es
title: T7.4 Urban and industrial ecosystems
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Cities, smaller settlements and industrial areas are structurally complex ecosystems and characterised by their highly dynamic spatial structure. Diverse patch types include buildings, paved surfaces, transport infrastructure, parks and gardens; excavations, bare ground and refuse areas. Patches undergo periodic destruction and renewal. Human population density is high, relative to other ecosystems, and dependent on large subsidies of imported resources (particularly water, nutrients and food). Interactions among patch types and human social behaviours produce emergent properties and complex feedbacks among ecosystem components.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These systems are structurally complex and highly heterogeneous fine-scale spatial mosaics of diverse patch types that may be recognised in fine-scale land use classifications. These include: a) buildings; b) paved surfaces; c) transport infrastructure: d) treed areas; e) grassed areas; f) gardens; g) mines or quarries; h) bare ground; and i) refuse areas. Patch mosaics are dynamic over decadal time scales and driven by socio-ecological feedbacks and a human population that is highly stratified, functionally, socially and economically. Interactions among patch types and human social behaviours produce emergent properties and complex feedbacks among components within each system and interactions with other ecosystem types. Unlike most other terrestrial ecosystems, the energy, water and nutrient sources of urban/industrial village systems are highly allochthonous and processes within urban systems drive profound and extensive global changes in land use, land cover, biodiversity, hydrology, and climate through both resource consumption and waste discharge. Biotic community structure is characterised by low functional and taxonomic diversity, highly skewed rank-abundance relationships and relict local endemism. Trophic networks are simplified and sparse and each node is dominated by few taxa. Urban/village biota include humans, dependents (e.g. companion animals and cultivars), opportunists and vagrants, and legacy biota whose establishment pre-dates settlement. Many biota have highly plastic realised niches, traits enabling wide dispersal, high fecundity, and short generation times. The persistence of dependent biota is maintained by human-assisted migration, managed reproduction, genetic manipulation, amelioration of temperatures, and intensive supplementation of nutrients, food, and water. Pest biota are controlled by the application of herbicides and pesticides or culling with collateral impacts on non-target biota.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Humans influence the availability of water, nutrients, and energy through governance systems for resource importation and indirectly through interactions and feedbacks. Light is enhanced artificially at night. Urban temperature regimes are elevated by the anthropogenic conversion of chemical energy to heat and the absorption of solar energy by buildings and paved surfaces. However, temperatures may be locally ameliorated within buildings. Surface water runoff is enhanced and percolation is reduced by sealed surfaces. Chemical and particulate air pollution, as well as light and noise pollution may affect biota. Infrastructure development and renewal, driven by socio-economic processes, as well as natural disasters (e.g. storms, floods, earthquakes, and tsunami) create recurring disturbances. There is frequent movement of humans and associated biota and matter between cities.
 
# Distribution
 
Extensively scattered through equatorial to subpolar latitudes from sea-level to submontane altitudes, mostly in proximity to the coast, rivers or lakes, especially in North America, Western Europe and Japan, as well as India, China, and Brazil. Land use maps depict fine-scale patch types listed above.

The distribution of urban and industrial infrastructure lands was taken from a global land use/land cover map (LULC class 7 ‘built areas’) for the year 2020 at 10 metre resolution (Karra _et al._ 2021). Class 7 includes major road and rail networks, large homogenous impervious surfaces including parking structures, office buildings and residential housing, dense. Sparse villages may not be represented. We calculated the proportion of built area per square kilometre and applied a threshold of 1 to 5 % for minor occurrences and >5% for major occurrences.

## Citation

DA Keith and RT Corlett. (2022). *T7.4 Urban and industrial ecosystems*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: T7.4.WM.nwx v1.0, updated 2021-11-19.

## References

### Main references
* Alberti M, Marzluff JM, Shulenberger E, Bradley G, Ryan C, Zumbrunnen C  (2003) *Integrating Humans into Ecology: Opportunities and Challenges for Studying Urban Ecosystems*. **Urban Ecology** (Eds. Marzluff J.M. et al.) Springer, Boston, MA. DOI: [10.1007/978-0-387-73412-5_9](http://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-73412-5_9)
* Grimm NB, Faeth SH, Golubiewski NE, Redman CL, Wu J, Bai X, Briggs JM  (2008) *Global change and the ecology of cities*. **Science** 319: 756-760.

### Map references
* Karra, Kontgis, et al. (2021) *Global land use/land cover with Sentinel-2 and deep learning*. **IGARSS 2021-2021 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium** IEEE.
