---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/t_5_1
content-id: T5.1
lang: es
title: T5.1 Semi-desert steppe
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Semi-desert steppes on all continents are dominated by perennial shrubs, often with semi-fleshy or velvety foliage, and tussock grasses interspersed with bare ground. Low variable rainfall and extreme temperatures favour flora and fauna with drought and stress-tolerance adaptations, such as deep roots and nomadism. Growth and reproduction of shrubs and grasses is varies with rainfall, the cover of grass diminishing to near zero in extended droughts. Grass cover also depends on soil fertility and grazing animals, which may also limit shrub recruitment and growth. These steppes are among the most productive of desert ecosystems, with relatively abundant small and large herbivorous and seed-eating mammals supporting bird and mammal predators and scavengers.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These mixed semi-deserts are dominated by suffrutescent (i.e. with a woody base) or subsucculent (semi-fleshy) perennial shrubs and tussock grasses. Productivity and biomass are limited by low average precipitation, extreme temperatures and, to a lesser extent, soil nutrients, but vary temporally in response to water availability. Vegetation takes a range of structural forms including open shrublands, mixed shrublands with a tussock grass matrix, prairie-like tall forb grasslands, and very low dwarf shrubs interspersed with forbs or grasses. Total cover varies from 10% to 30% and the balance between shrubs and grasses is mediated by rainfall, herbivory, and soil fertility. Stress-tolerator and ruderal life-history types are strongly represented in flora and fauna. Trait plasticity and nomadism are also common. Traits promoting water capture and conservation in plants include xeromorphy, deep roots, and C<sub>4</sub> photosynthesis. Shrubs have small (less than nanophyll), non-sclerophyll, often hairy leaves with moderate SLA. Shrubs act as resource-accumulation sites, promoting heterogeneity over local scales. C<sub>3</sub> photosynthesis is represented in short-lived shrubs, forbs, and grasses, enabling them to exploit pulses of winter rain. Consumers include small mammalian and avian granivores, medium-sized mammalian herbivores, and wide-ranging large mammalian and avian predators and scavengers. Abundant detritivores consume dead matter and structure resource availability and habitat characteristics over small scales. Episodic rainfall initiates trophic pulses with rapid responses by granivores and their predators, but less so by herbivores, which show multiple traits promoting water conservation.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Semi-desert steppes are associated with fine-textured, calcareous soils of low-moderate fertility, and may contain appreciable levels of magnesium or sodium. Clay particles exchange mineral ions with plant roots and have ‘reverse texture effects’, limiting moisture extraction as soils dry. Indurated subsoils influence infiltration/runoff relationships and vegetation patterns. Semi-desert steppes are not typically fire-prone and occur in temperate-arid climates. Mean annual rainfall (~150–300 mm), with and has a winter maximum. Evapotranspiration is 2-20 times greater than precipitation, but large rain events bring inter-annual pulses of water surplus. Temperatures are highly variable diurnally and seasonally, often exceeding 40°C in summer and reaching 0°C in winters but rarely with snow.
 
# Distribution
 
Extensive areas across the Sahara, the Arabian Peninsula, west Asia, southwest Africa, southern Australia, Argentina, and the Midwest USA.

Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu _et al._ 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.

## Citation

MG Tozer, DJ Eldridge and DA Keith. (2022). *T5.1 Semi-desert steppe*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: T5.1.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

## References

### Main references
* Eldridge DJ, Travers SK, Facelli AF, Facelli JM, Keith DA  (2017) *The Chenopod shrublands*. **Australian vegetation** (Ed. DA Keith), pp 599-625. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN [978-1-107-11843-0](http://www.cambridge.org/9781107118430).
* West NE (1983) *Comparisons and contrasts between the temperate deserts and semi-deserts of three continents*. **Ecosystems of the World** Vol. 5. (Ed. NE West) pp. 461–472. (Elsevier: Amsterdam).

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
