---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/m_3_4
content-id: M3.4
lang: es
title: M3.4 Seamounts, ridges and plateaus
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

These deep, lightless ecosystems are centred on major geomorphic features of deep ocean floors. These elevated features interrupt lateral ocean currents and generate upwelling of nutrients. This promotes productivity in surface waters, which returns to depths as detritus. The input of these resources, combined with varied rocky micohabitats, unlike the sand and mud around them, supports diverse communities of immobile filter feeders (e.g. sponges), mobile benthic organisms (e.g. molluscs and starfish), and large aggregations of fish, especially around seamounts.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Seamounts, plateaus, and ridges are major geomorphic features of the deep oceanic seafloor, characterised by hard substrates, elevated topography, and often higher productivity than surrounding waters. Topographically modified currents affect geochemical cycles, nutrient mixing processes, and detrital fallout from the euphotic zone that deliver allochthonous energy and nutrients to these heterotroph-dominated systems. Suspension-feeders and their dependents and predators dominate the trophic web, whereas deposit-feeders and mixed-feeders are less abundant than in other deep-sea systems. Autotrophs are generally absent. Summits that reach the euphotic zone are included within functional groups of the Marine shelf biome. Bathymetric gradients and local substrate heterogeneity support marked variation in diversity, composition, and abundance. Rocky walls, for example, may be dominated by sessile suspension-feeders including cnidarians (especially corals), sponges, crinoids, and ascidians. High densities of sessile animals may form deep-water biogenic beds ([M3.5](/explore/groups/M3.5)), but those systems are not limited to seamounts or ridges. Among the mobile benthic fauna, molluscs and echinoderms can be abundant. Seamounts also support dense aggregations of large fish, attracted by the high secondary productivity of lower trophic levels in the system, as well as spawning and/or nursery habitats. Elevated topography affects the distribution of both benthic and pelagic fauna. Seamounts and ridges tend to act both as stepping stones for the dispersal of slope-dwelling biota and as dispersal barriers between adjacent basins, while insular seamounts may have high endemism.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Seamounts, rising more than 1,000 m above the sediment-covered seabed, and smaller peaks, knobs, and hills are topographically isolated features, mostly of volcanic origin. Mid-ocean ridges are semi-continuous mountain chains that mark the spreading margins of adjacent tectonic plates. These prominent topographic formations interact with water masses and currents, increasing turbulence, mixing, particle retention, and the upward movement of nutrients from large areas of the seafloor. This enhances productivity on the seamounts and ridges themselves and also in the euphotic zone above, some of which returns to the system through detrital fallout. A diversity of topographic, bathymetric, and hydrodynamic features and substrate types (e.g. steep rocky walls, flat muddy areas, and biogenic habitats at varied depths) contribute to niche diversity and biodiversity. Major bathymetric clines associated with elevated topography produce gradients that shape ecological traits including species richness, community structure, abundance, biomass, and trophic modes.
 
# Distribution
 
About 171,000 seamounts, knolls, and hills documented worldwide so far, covering ~2.6% of the sea floor. Ridges cover ~9.2% of the sea floor along a semi-continuous, 55,000km long system.

Major occurrences of seamounts, ridges and plateaus was based on the ‘mountains’ classes within the abyssal geomorphic unit of Harris _et al._ (2014b). Occurrences were converted to 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## Citation

E Ramirez-Llodra, AA Rowden, IG Priede and DA Keith. (2022). *M3.4 Seamounts, ridges and plateaus*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: M3.4.web.orig v2.0, updated 2020-11-16.

## References

### Main references
* Rogers AD  (2018) *The Biology of Seamounts: 25 Years on*. **Advances in Marine Biology** 79:137-224. DOI: [10.1016/bs.amb.2018.06.001](http://doi.org/10.1016/bs.amb.2018.06.001)
* Schlacher A, Rowden AA, Dower JF, Consalvey M  (2010) *Recent advances in seamount ecology: A contribution to the Census of Marine Life*. **Marine Ecology** (special issue) 31: 1-241..

### Map references
* Harris PT, Macmillan-Lawler M, Rupp J, Baker EK  (2014) *Geomorphology of the oceans*. **Marine Geology** 352: 4-24. DOI: [10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011)
