---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/t_4_4
content-id: T4.4
lang: es
title: T4.4 Temperate woodlands
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Temperate woodlands are structurally simple, with widely-spaced trees and a ground layer of grasses with scattered shrubs. They are globally distributed in temperate climates with warm-season droughts. Tree foliage is typically evergreen, but may be deciduous in cold dry climates. During warm summers, productive grasses on fertile soils sustain a complex foodweb of insects, reptiles, birds and mammals. The ground flora varies with rainfall and tree cover, which creates diverse microhabitats beneath. Large herbivores and their predators are important to maintaining woodland composition, with burrowing mammals influencing soil and nutrient cycling. Fires occur periodically, but have less influence than in pyric savannas ([T4.2](/explore/groups/T4.2)) or forests ([T2.6](/explore/groups/T2.6)).

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These structurally simple woodlands are characterised by space between open tree crowns and a ground layer with tussock grasses, interstitial forbs, and a variable shrub component. Grasses with C<sub>3</sub> and C<sub>4</sub> photosynthetic pathways are common, but C<sub>4</sub> grasses may be absent from the coldest and wettest sites or where rain rarely falls in the summer. In any given area, C<sub>4</sub> grasses are most abundant in summer or on dry sites or areas with summer-dominant rainfall, while C<sub>3</sub> grasses predominate in winter, locally moist sites, cold sites, or areas without summer rainfall. The ground flora also varies inter-annually depending on rainfall. Trees generate spatial heterogeneity in light, water, and nutrients, which underpin a diversity of microhabitats and mediate competitive interactions among plants in the ground layer. Foliage is mostly microphyll and evergreen (but transmitting abundant light) or deciduous in colder climates. Diversity of plant and invertebrate groups may therefore be relatively high at local scales, but local endemism is limited due to long-distance dispersal. Productivity is relatively high as grasses rapidly produce biomass rich in N and other nutrients after rains. This sustains a relatively complex trophic network of invertebrate and vertebrate consumers. Large herbivores and their predators are important top-down regulators. Bioturbation by fossorial mammals influences soil structure, water infiltration, and nutrient cycling. The fauna is less functionally and taxonomically diverse than in most tropical savannas ([T4.1](/explore/groups/T4.1) and [T4.2](/explore/groups/T4.2)), but includes large and small mammals, reptiles, and a high diversity of birds and macro-invertebrates, including grasshoppers, which are major consumers of biomass. Plants and animals tolerate and persist through periodic ground fires that consume cured-grass fuels, but few have specialised traits cued to fire (cf. pyric ecosystems such as [T2.6](/explore/groups/T2.6)).

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
A water deficit occurs seasonally in summer, driven primarily by peak evapotranspiration under warm-hot temperatures and, in some regions, seasonal (winter-maximum) rainfall patterns. Mean annual rainfall is 350–1,000 mm. Low winter temperatures and occasional frost and snow may limit the growing season to 6–9 months. Soils are usually fine-textured and fertile, but N may be limiting in some areas. Fires burn mostly in the ground layers during the drier summer months at decadal intervals.
 
# Distribution
 
Temperate southeast and southwest Australia, Patagonia and Pampas of South America, western and eastern North America, the Mediterranean region, and temperate Eurasia.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## Citation

DA Keith, D Faber-Langendoen and J Franklin. (2022). *T4.4 Temperate woodlands*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: T4.4.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-20.

## References

### Main references
* Davis FW, Baldocchi DD, Tyler CM (2019) *Oak woodlands*. **Ecosystems of California** (Eds. HA Mooney, E Zavaleta). Chapter 25 pp 509-534. University of California Press, Berkeley. DOI: [10.1525/9780520962170-029](http://doi.org/10.1525/9780520962170-029)
* Gibson GJ  (2009) **Grasses and grassland ecology** Oxford University Press, Oxford.
* Prober SM, Gosper CR, Gilfedder L, Harwood TD, Thiele KR, Williams KJ, Yates CJ  (2017) *Temperate eucalypt woodlands*. **Australian vegetation** (Ed. DA Keith), pp 410-437. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN [978-1-107-11843-0](http://www.cambridge.org/9781107118430).

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
