---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/tf_1_6
content-id: TF1.6
lang: es
title: TF1.6 Boreal, temperate and montane peat bogs
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Peat bogs in the boreal-subarctic and temperate areas of the world account for up to 40% of the world’s soil carbon. They are landscape sponges, with highly specialised plant life including shrubs, sedges and mosses equipped to grow in acidic, nutrient-poor, low-oxygen, waterlogged soils. Sphagnum moss and other peat-forming plants are foundational to these ecosystems. Insects are the dominant animal group, along with amphibians, reptiles, rodents and a few visiting birds.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These patterned peatlands account for up to 40% of global soil carbon are dominated by a dense cover (high LAI) of hydrophytic mosses, graminoids, and shrubs, sometimes with scattered trees. Positive feedbacks between dense ground vegetation, hydrology, and substrate chemistry promote peat formation through water retention and inhibition of microbial decomposition. Moderate to low primary production is partially broken down at the soil surface by anamorphic fungi and aerobic bacteria. Burial by overgrowth and saturation by the water table promotes anaerobic conditions, limiting subsurface microbial activity, while acidity, nutrient scarcity, and low temperatures enhance the excess of organic deposition over decomposition. Plant diversity is low but fine-scale hydrological gradients structure vegetation mosaics, which may include fens ([TF1.7](/explore/groups/TF1.7)). Mosses (notably Sphagnum spp.) and graminoids with layering growth forms promote peat formation. Their relative abundance influences microbial communities and peat biochemistry. Plant traits such as lacunate stem tissues, aerenchyma, and surface root mats promote oxygen transport into the anaerobic substrate. Woody plant foliage is small (leptophyll-microphyll) and sclerophyllous, reflecting excess carbohydrate production in low-nutrient conditions. Plants and fungi reproduce primarily by cloning, except where disturbances (e.g. fires) initiate gaps enabling recruitment. Pools within the bogs have specialised aquatic food webs underpinned by algal production and allochthonous carbon. Invertebrate larvae are prominent consumers in the trophic network of bog pools, and as adults they are important pollinators and predators. Assemblages of flies, dragonflies, damselflies, caddisflies and other invertebrates vary with the number, size and stability of pools. Carnivorous plants (e.g. sundews) support N cycling. Vertebrates are mostly itinerant but include specialised resident amphibians, reptiles, rodents, and birds. Some regions are rich in locally endemic flora and fauna, particularly in the Southern Hemisphere.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Bogs are restricted to cool humid climates where moisture inputs (e.g. precipitation, seepage, and surface inflow) exceed outputs (e.g. evapotranspiration, percolation, and run-off) for extended periods, enabling these systems to function as landscape sponges. Seasonally low temperatures and/or frequent cloud cover limit evapotranspiration. Substrates are waterlogged, anaerobic, highly organic (usually >30% dry weight), acidic (pH 3.5–6), and nutrient-poor. Peat growth may produce raised ombrotrophic bogs entirely fed by rain, but if minerotrophic inflows from catchments occur, they provide limited nutrient subsidies (cf. [TF1.7](/explore/groups/TF1.7)). Fires may occur in dry summers, sometimes igniting peat with long-term consequences for ecosystem function and stability.
 
# Distribution
 
Extensive across boreal-subarctic latitudes, with small areas on tropical mountains of South America, New Guinea, and Central Africa and at cool, temperate southern latitudes in Patagonia and Australasia.

Terrestrial ecoregions containing major or minor occurrences of this ecosystem functional group were identified by consulting available ecoregion descriptions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017), global and regional reviews, national and regional ecosystem maps, locations of relevant examples, and proofed by expert reviewers. Consequently they are coarse-scale indicative representations of distribution, except where they occupy small ecoregions. Ecoregions were mapped at 30 arc second spatial resolution.

## Citation

DA Keith, RT Kingsford, F Essl, LJ Jackson, M Kelly-Quinn, KR Young and T Tahvanainen. (2022). *TF1.6 Boreal, temperate and montane peat bogs*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: TF1.6.web.orig v1.0, updated 2020-10-19.

## References

### Main references
* Palozzi JE, Lindo Z  (2017) *Boreal peat properties link to plant functional traits of ecosystem engineers*. **Plant and Soil** 418: 277-291.
* Wieder RK, Vitt DH  (2006) *Boreal peatland ecosystems*. **Ecological studies** vol. 188. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
