---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/m_1_10
content-id: M1.10
lang: es
title: M1.10 Rhodolith/Maërl beds
version: 'v2.1, 2022-06-29 04:33:38'
---

These slow growing biogenic structures are formed by long-lived coralline algae that absorb a wide spectrum of light, provide energy to the system and contribute to nutrient cycles. They can occur in shallow or intermediates depths with coarse gravel, sandy or mixed muddy substrates. The carbonate structures of living and dead rhodoliths, and the spatial (depth gradient) and temporal (diurnal and seasonal) variation in the environmental conditions provide habitat for diverse communities of macroinvertebrates and fish, along with other characteristic sessile organisms like algae and sponges. Storms, waves and other disturbances drive cycles of restructuring and slow recovery.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
Benthic carbonate ecosystems dominated by rhodoliths -- non-geniculate (non-jointed), free-living, slow-growing, long-lived coralline algae -- cover 30-100% of the seafloor within the beds, providing autochthonous energy to the system. Their pigments enable red algae to absorb more green - blue light efficiently, in addition to red-orange light. Rhodolith primary productivity is likely to be lower than in sea grasses ([M1.1](/explore/groups/M1.1)) and kelp forests ([M1.2](/explore/groups/M1.2)), although macrophytes add to primary production in shallow waters. They play a role in benthic nutrient cycling and represent significant long-term carbonate stores. Rhodoliths vary from smooth semi-spherical to complex fruticose structures that may form mono- or multi- specific aggregations typically composed of living and dead rhodoliths, as well as calcic sediments produced by breakdown. They can form 3-dimensional biogenic structures that facilitate coexistence of a diversity of benthic and demersal organisms, including algae, ascidians, sponges, macroinvertebrates and fish. Compared to coral reefs ([M1.3](/explore/groups/M1.3)), shellfish beds ([M1.4](/explore/groups/M1.4)) or marine animal forests ([M1.5](/explore/groups/M1.5)), where rhodoliths may be minor components, they are usually less rugose and less stable, due displacement or aggregation by water motion and bioturbators such as fish and macroinvertebrates. Large rhodoliths appear to facilitate deepwater kelp as well as feeding and reproduction in fish and invertebrates, supporting high species richness. High abundance of larval stages in these groups, suggests the intermediate rugosity of the beds is important for age-dependent predator evasion. Macroinvertebrate detritivores and herbivores well represented in rhodolith beds include crustaceans, molluscs, echinoderms and polychaetes. Closely associated microinvertebrates and microbes include small gastropods, ostracods, diatoms, foraminifera and bacteria. Bacterial guilds on rhodolith surfaces include photolithoautotrophs, anoxygenic phototrophs, anaerobic heterotrophs, sulfide oxidizers and methanogens, suggesting important roles in biomineralization. The biotic assemblages of rhodolith beds vary spatially, with depth gradients and temporally over diurnal and seasonal time scales. Fish and sponges that aggregate and agglutinate individual rhodoliths are thought to promote development of reefs from rhodolith beds, counter-balancing slow recovery from disturbance.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Rhodolith beds occur on coarse gravel, sandy or mixed muddy substrates. They are most common at depths of 5-150m, but may occur from the subtidal zone down to 270m below the ocean surface. Light availability, pH and hydrodynamics are important drivers of variation in biotic assemblages, as are temperatures. Rhodoliths form extensive beds on open coasts on the mid shelf and in tide-swept channels where the water column and suspended sediment diminish red light. Recurring disturbances such as bioturbation, wave action or storms physically restructure the system and initiate successional recovery.
 
# Distribution
 
Tropical to subpolar coastal waters, extensive areas in the north and southwest Atlantic, Mediterranean, Gulf of California and southern Australia.

Distribution of rhodolith beds was taken from spatial predictions of suitable habitats for rhodolith forming species at global scales, including both tropical  - warm temperate and polar - cold temperate affiliated rhodolith species (Fragkopoulou _et al._ 2021). Maps have a spatial resolution of 5 arc-minute. 

## Citation

DA Keith, W Nelson, E Fragkopoulou, J Assis and N Schubert. (2022). *M1.10 Rhodolith/Maërl beds*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-06-29.

**Map version**: M1.10.WM.nwx v1.0, updated 2021-12-20.

## References

### Main references
* Fragkopoulou Eliza, Serrão Ester A., Horta Paulo A., Koerich Gabrielle, Assis Jorge (2021) *Bottom Trawling Threatens Future Climate Refugia of Rhodoliths Globally*. **Frontiers in Marine Science** 7: 1246. DOI: [10.3389/fmars.2020.594537](http://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.594537)
* Moura RL, Abieri ML, Castro GM et al. (2021) *Tropical rhodolith beds are a major and belittled reef fish habitat *. **Scientific Reports** 11: 794.
* Pereira-Filho GH, Francini-Filho RB, Pierozzi I et al. (2015) *Sponges and fish facilitate succession from rhodolith beds to reefs*. **Bulletin of Marine Science** 91: 45-46.
* Riosmena-Rodríguez, R Nelson W, Aguirre J (2017) **Rhodolith/Maërl Beds: A global perspective** Springer, Cham..

### Map references
* Fragkopoulou Eliza, Serrão Ester A., Horta Paulo A., Koerich Gabrielle, Assis Jorge (2021) *Bottom Trawling Threatens Future Climate Refugia of Rhodoliths Globally*. **Frontiers in Marine Science** 7: 1246. DOI: [10.3389/fmars.2020.594537](http://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.594537)
