---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/groups/t_1_2
content-id: T1.2
lang: es
title: T1.2 Tropical/Subtropical dry forests and thickets
version: 'v2.1, 2022-04-06 05:02:01'
---

Tropical-subtropical dry forests and thickets are characterised by fertile substrates and seasonally dry conditions (~1800 mm per year, with a period of 3 to 6 months receiving less than 100 mm per month) that drive markedly seasonal patterns of productivity. Tree-diversity is high, with a variable mixture of evergreen and drought-deciduous trees, with abundant vines, but fewer epiphytes, ferns, mosses, and forbs, limited by seasonal drought. Abundant leaf litter is decomposed by fungi and microbes within complex foodwebs dominated by vertebrates of all kinds.

# Ecosystem Properties
 
These closed-canopy forests and thickets have drought-deciduous or semi-deciduous phenology in at least some woody plants (rarely fully evergreen), and thus seasonally high LAI. Strongly seasonal photoautotrophic productivity is limited by a regular annual water deficit/surplus cycle. Diversity is lower across most taxa than [T1.1](/explore/groups/T1.1), but tree and vertebrate diversity is high relative to most other forest systems. Plant growth forms and leaf sizes are less diverse than in [T1.1](/explore/groups/T1.1). Grasses are rare or absent, except on savanna ecotones, due to canopy shading and/or water competition, while epiphytes, ferns, bryophytes, and forbs are present but limited by seasonal drought. Trophic networks are complex with low exclusivity and diverse representation of herbivorous, frugivorous, and carnivorous vertebrates. Fungi and other microbes are important decomposers of abundant leaf litter and N-fixing plants can be abundant. Many woody plants are dispersed by wind and some by vertebrates. Most nutrient capital is sequestered in vegetation or cycled through the litter layer. Trees typically have thin bark and low fire tolerance and can recruit in shaded microsites, unlike many in savannas. Plants are tolerant of seasonal drought but can exploit moisture when it is seasonally available through high SLA and plastic productivity. Gap-phase dynamics are driven primarily by individual tree-fall and exploited by seedling banks and vines (seedbanks are uncommon). These forests may be involved in fire-regulated stable-state dynamics with savannas.

[DIAGRAM]

# Ecological Drivers
 
Overall water surplus (or small deficit <100 mm), but a substantial seasonal deficit in winter in which little or no rain falls within a 4–7-month period. Warm temperatures (minima rarely <10°C) with low-moderate diurnal and seasonal variability in the tropics, but greater seasonal variability in subtropical continental areas. Diverse substrates generally produce high levels of nutrients. Tropical storms may be important disturbances in some areas but flammability is low due to limited ground fuels except on savanna ecotones.
 
# Distribution
 
Seasonally dry tropical and subtropical regions in Central and West Africa, Madagascar, southern Asia, north and northern and eastern Australia, the Pacific, Central and South America and the Caribbean.

Major and minor occurrences were initially identified using consensus land-cover maps (Tuanmu _et al._ 2014) and then cropped to selected terrestrial ecoregions (Dinerstein _et al._ 2017) at 30 arc seconds spatial resolution. Ecoregions were selected if: i) their descriptions mentioned features consistent with those identified in the profile of the Ecosystem Functional Group; and ii) if their location was consistent with the ecological drivers described in the profile.

## Citation

RT Pennington, J Franklin, NA Brummitt, A Etter, KR Young, RT Corlett and DA Keith. (2022). *T1.2 Tropical/Subtropical dry forests and thickets*. In: Keith, D.A., Ferrer-Paris, J.R., Nicholson, E. *et al.* (2022). *A function-based typology for Earth’s ecosystems – Appendix S4. The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology v2.1: Descriptive profiles for Biomes and Ecosystem Functional Groups*. **Nature** DOI:[10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05318-4).
**Content version**: v2.1, updated 2022-04-06.

**Map version**: T1.2.web.mix v1.0, updated 2020-11-16.

## References

### Main references
* Bunyavejchewin SC, Baker P, Davis SJ  (2011) *Seasonally dry tropical forests in continental southeast Asia - structure, composition, and dynamics*. **The ecology and conservation of seasonally dry forests in Asia** WJ McShea, SJ Davis, N Bhumpakphan, (Eds), pp. 9-35. Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, Washington DC. ISBN [9781935623021](https://scholarlypress.si.edu/store/life-sciences-biodiversity/ecology-conservation-seasonally-dry-forests-as/).
* DRYFLOR, Banda-R K, Delgado-Salinas A, Dexter KG et al.  (2016) *Plant diversity patterns in neotropical dry forests and their conservation implications*. **Science** 353:1383-1387. DOI: [10.1126/science.aaf5080](http://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf5080)
* Murphy PG, Lugo AE  (1986) *Ecology of tropical dry forest*. **Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics** 17:67–88. DOI: [10.1146/annurev.es.17.110186.000435](http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.17.110186.000435)
* Pennington RT, Lewis G, Ratter J  (2006) **Neotropical savannas and dry forests: plant diversity, biogeography and conservation** CRC Press, Florida.

### Map references
* Dinerstein E, Olson D, Joshi A, Vynne C, Burgess ND, Wikramanayake E, Hahn N, Palminteri S, Hedao P, Noss R, Hansen M, Locke H, Ellis EE, Jones B, Barber CV, Hayes R, Kormos C, Martin V, Crist E, Sechrest W, Price L, Baillie JEM, Weeden D, Suckling K, Davis C, Sizer N, Moore R, Thau D, Birch T, Potapov P, Turubanova S, Tyukavina A, de Souza N, Pintea L, Brito JC, Llewellyn Barnekow Lillesø JP, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Voge M, Al-Shammari KF, Saleem M  (2017) *An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm*. **BioScience** 67: 534–545. [Data-set](https://ecoregions2017.appspot.com/). DOI: [10.1093/biosci/bix014](http://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/bix014)
* Tuanmu, M.-N. and W. Jetz (2014) *A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for biodiversity and ecosystem modeling*. **Global Ecology and Biogeography** 23(9):1031--1045. DOI: [10.1111/geb.12182](http://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12182)
