---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/glossary/
lang: en
title: Glossary
---
# Glossary of selected terms

**Allochthonous energy**: Energy imported into an ecosystem from external sources in the form of organic material.

**Ambient environment**: Non-resource environmental factors that modify the availability of resources or the ability of organisms to acquire them

**Aphotic**: A zone where light intensity is too low to support photosynthesis

**Autochthonous energy**:	Energy captured from abiotic sources in situ by autotrophs living within an ecosystem.

**Autotroph**: An organism that fixes carbon from its surroundings, manufacturing complex energy-storing organic compounds, generally using energy from light (photosynthesis) or inorganic chemical reactions (chemosynthesis). Autotrophs are primary producers in trophic webs.

**Basin fill**: Unconsolidated to moderately consolidated subterranean sediments that bear aquifers. They are composed of gravel, sand, silt, and clay deposited on antecedent alluvial fans, pediments, flood plains, and playas.

**Biofilm**:	*Periphyton*. A complex layer composed of algae, cyanobacteria and heterotrophic microbes embedded in a mucopolysaccharide matrix cohering to submerged aquatic surfaces. Important food source for aquatic animals.

**Biogenic**: A structure created by living organisms (e.g. a coral reef, tunnels in soils or sediment).

**C<sub>3</sub>**: The most common photosynthetic pathway in plants based only on the Calvin cycle with associated energy loss to photorespiration and dependence on daytime CO<sub>2</sub> uptake, dominating environments with abundant moisture, and cool temperatures.

**C<sub>4</sub>**: A photosynthetic pathway with a supplementary C-fixation pathway that minimises photorespiration, reduces CO<sub>2</sub> demand and increases water use efficiency, often dominating warm and dry environments.

**CAM**:	A specialised C4 photosynthetic pathway in which CO<sub>2</sub> uptake and fixation occurs during the night, followed by internal release in daytime  when light dependent photosynthesis can take place. Stomatal closure during the day, reducing moisture loss enabling survival in very hot and dry conditions.

**Cauliflory**:	An arrangement of flowers and fruits in which they are borne directly on the main stems of a tree.

**Chemoautotroph**:	An organism that fixes carbon from its surroundings using energy from inorganic chemical reactions.

**C:N ratio**: Carbon-to-nitrogen ratio in biological tissues. Reflects differences in tissue composition related to nitrogen availability and capture as well as woodiness in plants.

**Dimictic lakes**:	Lakes with waters that mix from top to bottom twice per year, before and after surface freezing in winter.

**Disturbances**:	Sequences or ‘regimes’ of environmental events that destroy living biomass, liberate and redistribute resources and trigger life history processes in some organisms (e.g. fires, floods, storms, mass movement).

**Dystrophic**:	Waters with low levels of dissolved nutrients, high acidity, brown colouration and low light penetration due to tanins, organic acids and undecayed plant matter, usually orginating from peaty substrates

**Euphotic**:	A zone with abundant light, and hence able to support photosynthesis.

**Emergent**:	A large tree, emerging above the height of a main forest canopy.

**Engineer**:	Ecological or ecosystem engineers are organisms that directly or indirectly alter the biotic or abiotic structure of ecosystems and resource availability, making it suitable for habitation by other organisms (Jones et al. 1994).

**Epicormic resprouting**:	New shoots on trees emerging from meristematic tissues beneath the bark on large stems and trunks, usually after death of canopy foliage.

**Ericoid leaves**:	Small, sclerophyllous leaves with thick cuticles and typically crowded on the branchlets; resembling those of heather.

**Euphotic**:	A zone with abundant light that can support photosynthesis.

**Heterotroph**:	An organism that cannot manufacture its own food by carbon fixation and therefore derives its intake of nutrition from other sources of organic carbon, mainly plant or animal matter. In the food chain, heterotrophs are secondary and tertiary consumers. Heterotrophs are consumers in trophic webs, including decomposers, detritivores, herbivores and predators.

**LAI**:	*Leaf Area Index*, the projected area of leaves as a proportion of the area of land in which it is measured. Useful in remote sensing for describing vegetation density.

**Mass movement**:	Bulk movements of soil and/or rock debris down slope or vertically downwards in response to gravity.

**Mesophotic**:	A zone of moderate light intensity that can support photosynthesis.

**Meromictic lakes**:	Lakes with waters that rarely mix from top to bottom, and thus remaining semi-permanently stratified into stable layers with contrasting temperature and hydrochemistry and biota.

**Monomictic lakes**:	Lakes with waters that mix from top to bottom once per year, regardless of whether the surface freezes in winter, although the seasonal timing of mixing depends on whether surface freezing occurs.


**Peat**:	A deposit of partially decayed organic matter in the upper soil horizons.

**Periphyton**:	*Biofilm*. A complex layer composed of algae, cyanobacteria and heterotrophic microbes embedded in a mucopolysaccharide matrix cohering to submerged aquatic surfaces. Important food source for aquatic animals.

**Photoautotroph**:	An organism that fixes carbon from its surroundings using energy from light.

**Phreatic**:	Related to groundwater or aquifers.

**Polymicitic lakes**:	Lakes with waters that mix continuously from top to bottom, and thus are never vertically stratified, usually due to their shallow depth.

**Primary productivity**:	The amount of chemical energy (expressed as carbon biomass) that autotrophs create in a given length of time.

**Resources**:	Five fundamental resources in the environment that are essential to sustaining all life: water, nutrients, oxygen, carbon and energy.

**Ruderal**:	Plants with a combination of life-history traits that enable colonisation of open post-disturbance environments. Traits and related trade-offs include rapid growth, high fecundity, wide propagule dispersal, short life-span, high demands for nutrients and intolerance of competition.

**SLA**:	*Specific Leaf Area*, the ratio of area of a fresh leaf to its dry mass. Positively related to plant relative growth rate.

**Sclerophyll**:	Plants or vegetation bearing leaves hardened by an abundance of woody tissue (sclerenchyma) and thick cuticles. Typically associated with environments that experience limited nutrients or water or cold stress.

**Secondary productivity**:	Biomass of heterotrophic (consumer) organisms generated in a given length of time, driven by the transfer of organic material between trophic levels.

**Serotinous**:	Refers to seedbanks that are held in woody fruits retained on the parent plant for later release, which may occur spontaneously or en masse in response to fire or adult mortality.

**Semelparous**:	Plant life cycle with a single reproductive episode before death.

**Succulent**:	Having tissues (usually leaves or stems of plats) engorged with water, as a mechanism for drought tolerance or salt dilution.

**Ultramafic**: Rocks and derivative soils with low silica content, also low in Potassium, but with high concentrations of Magnesium and Iron.

**Xeromorphic**: Plants and animals possessing traits that enable them to tolerate drought by storing water, enhancing uptake and reducing loss. Example traits include nocturnal activity, deep roots, etc.

# Notes

## Productivity
 Descriptive profiles use ordinal descriptors (high, medium and low)  of productivity, i.e. Net Primary Productivity, unless otherwise state.  For terrestrial and transitional realms, these descriptors are based on estimates from an ensemble of global vegetation models (Cramer et al. 1999; Kicklighter et al. 1999; Huston & Wolverton 2009). For marine surface systems, they are based on estimates of chlorophyll a concentration for upper (Sarmiento et la. 2004; Huston & Wolverton 2009):

| Ordinal descriptor |	Terrestrial and transitional | Marine |
|---|---|---|
| | g dry mass m<sup>-2</sup>.yr<sup>-1</sup> | mg.m<sup>-3</sup> chlorophyll a concentration |
| High | >2000  | >8  |
| Medium | 500 – 2000   | 0.1 – 8    |
| Low | <500 | <0.1   |

## Leaf size

Terms describing leaf size follow Raunkiaer (1934):

| Size class |	Leaf area |
|---|---|
|  |	in mm<sup>2</sup> |
|Megaphyll	|> 164,025  |
|Macrophyll	|18,225-164,025|
|Mesophyll	|2,025-18,225 |
|Notophyll	|[2,025–4,500 ]|
|Microphyll	|225-2,025 |
|Nanophyll	|25–225 |
|Leptophyll	|< 25 |


# REFERENCES

* Cramer W, Kicklighter DW, Bondeau A, Moore Iii B, Churkina G, Nemry B, Ruimy A, Schloss AL, Participants of the Potsdam NPP Model Intercomparison (1999) *Comparing global models of terrestrial net primary productivity (NPP): overview and key results*. **Global Change Biology** 5, 1–15
* Huston MA, Wolverton S (2009) *The global distribution of net primary production: resolving the paradox*. **Ecological monographs** 79, 343–377
* Jones CG, Lawton JH, Shachak M (1994) *Organisms as ecosystem engineers*. **Oikos** 69, 373-386. 
* Kicklighter DW, Bondeau A, Schloss AL, Kaduk J, McGuire AD, the Participants of the Potsdam NPP Model Intercomparison (1999) *Comparing global models of terrestrial net primary productivity (NPP): global pattern and differentiation by major biomes*. **Global Change Biology** 5, 16–24
* Raunkiaer C (1934) *The use of leaf size in biological plant geography*. In **The life forms of plants and statistical biogeography.** (Eds AGTH Gilbert-Carter, A Fausbøll) pp. 368–378. (Oxford: Clarendon)
* Sarmiento JL, Gruber N, Brzezinski MA, Dunne JP (2004) *High-latitude controls of thermocline nutrients and low latitude biological productivity*. **Nature** 427, 56–60
