---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/impacts/
lang: en
title: Policy impacts
---

# Global policy impact

Recognition that ecosystems play an essential role in sustaining biodiversity and the ecosystem services that support human well-being and the economy has generated international demand for scientific support to adapt monitoring and reporting systems to ecosystems.

Since development in 2020, the Global Ecosystem Typology (GET) has rapidly gained status as a global policy instrument for monitoring and reporting on ecosystems. 

It provides the reference classification for assets in ecosystem accounts based on the UN System for Environmental Economic Accounts – Ecosystem Accounts (SEEA-EA), and is used for reporting on targets and goals of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity as a Headline Indicator of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF). 

## Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF)

At a national to regional level, the GET has been adopted into policy by **Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF)**. The Global Ecosystem Typology has been adopted in the agreed targets and monitoring framework of the UN Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework by signatories to the Convention on Biological Diversity. 

The Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework was adopted during the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP 15) following a four-year consultation and negotiation process. This historic Framework, which supports the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and builds on the Convention’s previous Strategic Plans, sets out an ambitious pathway to reach the global vision of a world living in harmony with nature by 2050. Among the Framework’s key elements are 4 goals for 2050 and 23 targets for 2030. 

In February 2025 , The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology was adopted for reporting and disaggregation of ecosystem-related headline indicators as part of the Global Biodiversity Framework. After lengthy discussions, the final text “invites parties to make use of the Global Ecosystem Typology, or an equivalent methodology, and cross-reference their national ecosystem data with levels 2 and 3 of that typology.” 

The typology is listed in the recommended disaggregations for several headline indicators, including A.1 (Red List of Ecosystems), A.2 (Extent of Natural Ecosystems), and 2.1 (Area Under Restoration). This will support consistent reporting on ecosystems across indicators and countries, allowing for more effective measurement of progress in conservation actions and outcomes for ecosystem

The Convention on Biological Diversity have also released detailed guidance on using the indicators of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework , prepared by the COP Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group (AHTEG) working group. In particular, Section 2b  - Using a consistent ecosystem classification to support the monitoring framework of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework based on the IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology. This guidance is primarily aimed at use in national implementation of the monitoring framework. 

## Global standard for UN Statistical Classifications

The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting – Ecosystem Accounting (SEEA EA) was adopted by the United Nations Statistical Commission in March 2021 as an international statistical standard for the ecosystem accounting framework and physical ecosystem accounts. It presents internationally recognized statistical principles and recommendations for the valuation of ecosystem services and assets. 

The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology (GET) was formally endorsed for adoption into the international Family of Statistical Classifications as a reference classification for assets in ecosystem accounts, in a significant decision by the United Nations Committee of Experts on International Statistical Classifications during its meeting held in New York in 2023.^[United Nations Committee of Experts on International Statistical Classifications (UNCEISC) (2023) United Nations Committee of Experts on International Statistical Classifications (UNCEISC)[^1].
 

The adoption of SEEA EA and integration of the GET, is a historic step forward towards transforming how nature is viewed and valued. Importantly, environmental degradation will be reflected in balance sheets and can be recognized as a cost in the measurement of economic growth.

[^1]: Summary Report 24-27 October 2023](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/classifications/Meetings/UNCEISC2024/Session1_Summary_UNCEISC_2023.pdf)


CBD. (2025) Monitoring framework for the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework - Draft decision submitted by the Chair of Working Group I (CBD/COP/16/L.26/Rev.1) https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/1e13/f20d/81cd8447744640bbd21e008f/cop-16-l-26-rev1-en.pdf
  CBD. (2024) Revised guidance on using the indicators of the monitoring framework of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (CBD/COP/16/INF/3/Rev.1) https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/ea34/8414/8c5e6797d291af15f33d6e40/cop-16-inf-03-rev1-en.pdf
  United Nations (2024) System of Environmental-Economic Accounting: Ecosystem Accounting. New York: United Nations. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/42574 License: CC BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO.


