---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/privacy/
lang: en
title: Privacy policy
---


# Privacy policy

We invite you to carefully read this privacy policy which explains what personal information we collect, hold or process about you, your rights and obligations and how you can enforce them.

Without your explicit consent, this Website does not collect or store your Personal Data, except for the essential hosting and infrastructure services it requires to function.

In addition, and only with your explicit consent, Personal Data is collected by third-party services. You can disable these third-party services by declining your consent at any time.

Any capitalised terms are defined at the end of this policy.

---
## Types of Data collected

Among the types of Personal Data that this Application collects, by itself or through third parties, there are: Cookies; Usage Data; Personal data provided by you.

Details on each type of Personal Data collected are provided in this privacy policy or by specific explanation texts displayed prior to the Data collection.

Personal Data may be freely provided by the User, or, in case of Usage Data, collected automatically when using this Application.

Any use of Cookies by this website or by the owners of third-party services used by this Website serves the purpose of providing the service required by the User. Cookies help us to provide you with a good experience when you browse the Global Ecosystem Typology Website and allows us to improve it. To remember your third-party cookie preference, this Website uses a cookie.

Personal Data is collected for the following purposes and using the following services:

### Essential hosting and infrastructure services 

**Firebase**
We use Firebase to host our website.
Firebase Hosting uses IP addresses of incoming requests to detect abuse and provide customers with detailed analysis of usage data, as specified in the privacy policy of the service. 
Place of processing: United States
or more information on privacy and security in Firebase, see [firebase.google.com/support/privacy](https://firebase.google.com/support/privacy).

**GitHub**
Hosting content and map data
Personal Data: various types of Data as specified in the privacy policy of the service 
Place of processing: United States
See GitHub Privacy Statement:
[docs.github.com/en/github/site-policy/github-privacy-statement](https://docs.github.com/en/github/site-policy/github-privacy-statement)

**Mapbox**
Mapbox is a maps visualization service provided by Mapbox Inc. that allows this website to incorporate maps on its pages.
Personal Data: Cookies; Usage Data, as specified in the privacy policy of the service.
Place of processing: United States
Privacy Policy:
[mapbox.com/legal/privacy/](https://mapbox.com/legal/privacy/)

### Non-essential services

**Google Forms**
With your consent, we use Google Forms for collecting feedback. Google Drive is a service to save and manage data collected, provided by Google LLC.
Personal Data: various types of Data as specified in the privacy policy of the service.
Place of processing: United States – Privacy Policy. Privacy Shield participant.
[policies.google.com/privacy](https://policies.google.com/privacy)
We use your email address to communicate with you, if provided by you, and only for the purposes requested by you. 

**Google Analytics**
With your consent, we may use Google Analytics, a web analytics service offered by Google that tracks and reports website traffic. Google uses the data collected to track and monitor the use of our Service. This data is shared with other Google services.
You can also opt-out of having your activity available to Google Analytics by installing the Google Analytics opt-out browser add-on. The add-on prevents the Google Analytics JavaScript (ga.js, analytics.js, and dc.js) from sharing information with Google Analytics about visits activity.
Personal Data: various types of Data as specified in the privacy policy of the service.
Place of processing: United States – Privacy Policy. Privacy Shield participant.

---
## External Links

