---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/typology/
lang: en
title: Typology
---
# The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology

## Introducing the new IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology

Version 1.01 of the <a href=https://iucnrle.org/static/media/uploads/references/research-development/keith_etal_iucnglobalecosystemtypology_v1.01.pdf" target="_blank">IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology</a> is now available. The new typology comprises six hierarchical levels to support applications across global to local scales. The three upper levels classify ecosystems based on their functional characteristics, irrespective of species composition. The three lower levels of classification distinguish functionally similar ecosystems from one another based on compositional resemblance and enable integration of established classifications already in use and incorporated into policy infrastructure at national levels. This is crucial, as important conservation action occurs at local levels, where most expertise resides.

The typology is based on an explicit theoretical framework with contributions from an extensive global network of ecosystem experts. It differs from the <a href="https://www.iucnredlist.org/resources/habitat-classification-scheme" target="_blank">IUCN Habitats Classification Scheme</a>, designed to characterize habitats of individual species rather than ecosystem processes. Version 1.0 includes a set of systematic profiles describing the key ecological traits, functional processes and global distribution of biomes and ecosystem functional groups throughout the biosphere. The typology applies the same classificatory framework and underlying model to ecosystems across marine, freshwater, terrestrial and subterranean environments.

## Hierarchical classification

### Realms

The five realms represent all parts of the biosphere. A conceptual model of ecosystem assembly was used to describe and compare the ecological drivers and traits that characterise the five realms. This comparative analysis helped to identify major gradients of variation and informed the definition of functional biomes (level 2) and ecosystem functional groups (level 3) within each realm.

### Biomes

The biome concept evolved from its original application to continental-scale vegetation units associated with major climate types, to units reflecting functional and evolutionary processes, albeit still with an emphasis on terrestrial vegetation (Mucina 2018). Here, we adopt elements of the functional biome concept proposed by Moncrieff et al. (2016) and generalised by Mucina (2018). We took a deductive approach to definition of units, using our conceptual model to focus a priori on convergent ecosystem functions and traits that are shaped by one or more dominant assembly processes (Keith et al. in review).

The focus on traits and the ecological drivers that shape them, albeit qualitative, enabled us to extend the traditional scope of the biome concept from vegetation-climate relationships on land (Ricklefs & Relye 2018) to the entire biosphere. For example, functional distinctions justify recognition of different biomes on marine shelves and the deep sea floor. Marine shelves host diverse photoautotroph communities of benthic macrophytes, epiphytic algae and planktonic algae, compared to the deep sea floor, where a lack of sunlight precludes the existence of any photoautotrophs. The pelagic ocean waters, with exclusively planktonic autotrophs that diminish with depth (hence sunlight penetration), define a third functionally distinctive biome in the oceans. Conceptually, such distinctions in ecosystem are analogous to those between traditionally recognised terrestrial biomes, such as tropical forests and deserts that show marked contrasts in structural features of their autotroph communities shaped by the availability of water. In both cases, the diagnostic of functional differences between candidate biomes is founded on a diagnosis of major assembly filters that come to the fore in shaping functional traits of the ecosystems assignable to them. Although the ultimate outcomes involve subjective judgements, there is a common conceptual model and clear justification or recognition of separate biomes.

Version v1.0 of the global ecosystem typology recognises 25 biomes. As noted above, many conform to ‘traditional’ terrestrial biomes (e.g. Whittaker 1975; Ricklefs & Relye 2018) because of the close interrelations between functional traits and plant dominant growth forms. Other functionally distinctive groupings fall outside the traditional scope of the biome concept, including lentic and lotic freshwater biomes, pelagic and benthic marine biomes, and several anthropogenic biomes. Ecosystems in this latter group are created by human activity, which continues to drive and maintain their assembly (Ellis et al. 2010).

### Ecosystem Functional Groups

Expert working groups for each realm delineated candidate ecosystem functional groups (Level 3) through a development and review process. They identified gradients in key assembly filters for each biome and identified major ecosystem and species traits that vary along them. In terrestrial environments, key assembly gradients include water deficit, seasonality, temperature, nutrient deficiency, fire activity and herbivory. In subterranean environments, substrate structure is a major factor. In freshwater environments, gradients in flow continuity and velocity, water body size, seasonal freezing and salinity are key assembly filters. In marine environments, depth gradients in light, vertical and horizontal movement of nutrients and substrate stability and particle size are major assembly filters.

Experts delineated candidate functional groups by identifying distinctive sets of traits associated with particular segments of the assembly filter space defined by the gradients.

For each candidate ecosystem functional group, we represented the key drivers and traits in simplified conceptual models derived from the generic assembly model (Keith et al. in review) as a basis for review and description. We adjusted and augmented descriptions based on published reviews (see cited references in the descriptive profiles below) and in consultation with broader networks of specialists (e.g. through <a href="https://www.iucn.org/commissions/commission-ecosystem-management/about">IUCN’s Commission on Ecosystem Management biome specialist groups</a>.

Finally, we prepared indicative global distribution maps from available spatial data. In some cases, high-resolution published maps were available (e.g. Murray et al. 2019). In other cases, we prepared coarse resolution maps using environmental proxies (e.g. Harris et al. 2004) or by identifying ecoregions documented as containing major or minor occurrences of ecosystem types referrable to respective functional groups (Spalding et al. 2007; Abell et al. 2008; Dinerstein et al. 2017). Occurrence information was gleaned from descriptions of ecoregions, references cited in the descriptive profiles for respective functional groups and personal observations of the authors.
