---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/methods/
lang: en
title: Methods
---
# Development of the typology

This typology was developed over more than two years, with an extensive development and review process initiated and co-ordinated by the [IUCN Commission on Ecosystem Management](https://www.iucn.org/commissions/commission-ecosystem-management). The initial structure of the typology was developed at a forum attended by 48 specialists in marine, freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems at Kings College London in May 2017, funded by the [PLuS Alliance](https://plusalliance.org/). Lead contributors then drafted descriptive profiles for each Ecosystem Functional Group, in consultation with other experts. Review of the definition and arrangement of units within the typological hierarchy was co-ordinated by the lead author (David Keith, University of New South Wales).

This consultation and review process was an extensive community effort, with "ecosystem leaders" engaged for all realms and biomes in the world, representing the collective views of global research networks, numbering hundreds of people. In all, some 30 specialists formally reviewed 1-14 ecosystem functional types each, with less formal comment and input received through a much larger group of experts at international conferences, workshops and meetings during 2017- 2019. Workshops arranged by IUCN Commission on Ecosystem Management and international conference symposia (20-100 participants) formed part of a broad consultation process,  held at the following locations and dates:

* London, UK May 2017– IUCN workshop/meeting
* Cartagena, Colombia July 2017 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Cartagena, Colombia July 2017 – [ICCB symposium](https://conbio.org/images/content_conferences/ICCB2017_Abstract_Book_web_w_doi.pdf)
* Naypyidaw, Myanmar, Sept 2017 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Newcastle, Australia, November 2017 – ESA symposium
* Canberra, Australia, May 2018 – Boden conference
* Davos Switzerland, June 2018 – Polar2018 symposium
* Gland Switzerland June 2018 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Amman, Jordan, Sept 2018 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Dubai, UAE, Oct 2018 – [Eye ON Earth symposium](https://iucnrle.org/blog/rle-eye-on-earth-summit/)
* Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia July 2019 – ICCB symposium
* Maputo, Mozambique, Mar 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Mombasa, Kenya Mar 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* New York, USA, June 2019 – [UN SEEA-EEA forum of experts](https://seea.un.org/events/2019-forum-experts-seea-experimental-ecosystem-accounting)
* Jurmala, Latvia, Sept 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Helsinki, Finland, Oct 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Sydney, Australia, Nov 2019 – [Ocean Ecosystems Accounting symposium](https://www.unescap.org/events/global-dialogue-ocean-accounting-and-first-annual-meeting-global-ocean-accounts-partnership)

Based on input from working group members and from the participants in consultation meetings, v1.0 of the Global Ecosystem Typology was completed in October 2019, with descriptions and indicative maps for 102 Ecosystem Functional Groups arranged within 25 biomes and five realms. In February 2020, v1.01 of the typology with one additional functional group, was published in a report made available through the [IUCN Red List of ecosystems website](https://iucnrle.org/static/media/uploads/references/research-development/keith_etal_iucnglobalecosystemtypology_v1.01.pdf).

The second phase was an intensive peer review of the descriptive profiles and maps by leading ecosystem scientists whose expertise spanned all biomes in the typology. The peer review process was managed by Associate Professor Emily Nicholson (Deakin University). A total of 48 specialists undertook 235 reviews of profiles.  Their contributions represent the collective views of global research networks numbering hundreds of experts. A comprehensive revision v1.01 of the typology and the descriptive profiles was undertaken in response to reviewer comments. The revisions included the addition of five Ecosystem Functional Groups to the typology to encompass variation that was not well unaccounted for in v1.01, major revisions to profiles of four existing Ecosystem Functional Groups and a large numbers of fine adjustments to the text, diagrams and maps across all remaining Ecosystem Functional Groups. In addition, a global review of map data sets available for ecosystems enabled the coarse-scale indicative maps of EFGs to be replaced with maps of greater spatial resolution, which were standardised to a 30 arc-second latitudinal and longitudinal grid.

The third phase involved testing the typology by developing cross-walks with established national classifications of ecological units. The majority of these classifications were for terrestrial environments based on features of surface vegetation, some were for freshwater environments and a few covered marine environments. The cross-walks were based on expert elicitation. Information on uncertain membership relationships was used to resolve ambiguities in the description of Ecosystem Functional Groups and develop a description for one additional group.

The fourth phase was a further peer review to conform with IUCN’s publication policy. Two experts, one terrestrial specialist and one marine specialist, were engaged to review the entire report including descriptive profiles for Ecosystem Functional Groups within their respective areas of expertise.

The process outlined above involved up to six iterations of review and revision for each descriptive profile, and sometimes involved significant addition of content, revision of group definitions or recognition of additional groups. All profiles were reviewed and edited for conceptual consistency by the lead author, and subject to a final production edit by Dr Lucie Bland.

The ***IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology (v2.0)*** is available at the [IUCN publications website](https://portals.iucn.org/library/node/49250).

# Indicative distribution maps

Separate distribution maps were developed for each Ecosystem Functional Group, largely independently of one another. This multilayer format to the spatial data enabled us to incorporate more spatial information on EFG distributions than is possible in a single composite map. It also enabled us to accommodate different levels of data quality and uncertainty, different degrees of spatial dynamism over relatively short time scales, and spatial juxtapositions with other EFGs. The multi-layered format allows occurrences of two or more EFGs to be represented within the same spatial unit (i.e. grid cells).

The maps show areas of the world containing major or minor occurrences of each EFG. Minor occurrences are areas where an EFG is scattered in patches within matrices of others or where they occur in substantial areas but only within a segment of a larger region.

The maps were designed to be indicative of global distribution patterns and are not intended to represent fine-scale patterns. The spatial grain of map rasters varies from 10 minutes to 1 degree of latitude and longitude, depending on the resolution of available base layers. Given bounds of resolution and accuracy of source data, the maps should be used to query which EFG are likely to occur within areas, rather than which occur at particular point locations.

Initially, existing spatial data were first searched on map units that aligned with the concept of individual EFGs by comparing descriptions in metadata or associated publications to the EFG descriptive profiles. Matching data sets were found for 27 EFGs comprising either polygons or rasters (e.g. [MT1.2](/explore/groups/MT1.2), [T7.4](/explore/groups/T7.4), [M1.3](/explore/groups/M1.3)) or point records (i.e. [MFT1.1](/explore/groups/MFT1.1)). For eight of those EFGs, direct maps were supplemented with biogeographic regions likely to contain minor occurrences (i.e. [TF1.1](/explore/groups/TF1.1)). In some cases, maps were found to align with key features of EFGs, but applied them over a broader range of environments or locations. In those cases (12 EFGs), environmental spatial data or biogeographic regions were used to clip the broader mapped extent to achieve closer alignment with the EFG concept (e.g. [F1.1](/explore/groups/F1.1), [T1.1](/explore/groups/T1.1)).

For 34 EFGs that had no direct mapping, maps were assembled from simple combinations of remote sensing and/or environmental proxies, clipped by biogeographic regions where necessary. For the remaining 33 EFGs that had no suitable environmental proxies or remote sensing, indicative maps were developed based on biogeographic regions, informed by a variety of non-spatial and spatial sources to create envelopes plausibly containing the EFG distribution (i.e. [T4.5](/explore/groups/T4.5)). One EFG ([S1.2](/explore/groups/S1.2)) was not mapped due to its distribution throughout the Earth’s crust.

Although ecoregions (Spalding et al., 2007; Abell et al., 2008; Dinerstein et al., 2017) are one of numerous spatial data sets used in the construction of some of the maps, it must be emphasised that EFGs are conceptually different entities to ecoregions. We used ecoregions in mapping as a template to constrain the extent mapped from remote sensing and environmental proxies. Consequently, when EFGs are aggregated into functional biomes (Level 2 of the Global Ecosystem Typology), spatial patterns may differ from those of biogeographic biomes as mapped and described in respective ecoregion classifications (provinces of Spalding et al., 2007; major habitat types of Abell et al., 2008; biomes of Olson et al., 2001; and Dinerstein et al., 2017). Differences reflect distinctions between functional and biogeographic interpretations of the term ‘biome’ (Mucina, 2019).
