---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /en/about/
lang: en
title: About
---


# About

The content for this website has been drawn from the ***IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology (v2.0)***.

### Citation

David A. Keith, José R. Ferrer-Paris, Emily Nicholson and Richard T. Kingsford (eds.) (2020) **The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups**.  Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.  

## Development of the typology

This typology was developed over more than two years, with an extensive development and review process initiated and co-ordinated by the [IUCN Commission on Ecosystem Management](https://www.iucn.org/commissions/commission-ecosystem-management). The initial structure of the typology was developed at a forum attended by 48 specialists in marine, freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems at Kings College London in May 2017, funded by the [PLuS Alliance](https://plusalliance.org/). Lead contributors then drafted descriptive profiles for each Ecosystem Functional Group, in consultation with other experts. Review of the definition and arrangement of units within the typological hierarchy was co-ordinated by the lead author (David Keith, University of New South Wales).

This consultation and review process was an extensive community effort, with "ecosystem leaders" engaged for all realms and biomes in the world, representing the collective views of global research networks, numbering hundreds of people. In all, some 30 specialists formally reviewed 1-14 ecosystem functional types each, with less formal comment and input received through a much larger group of experts at international conferences, workshops and meetings during 2017- 2019. Workshops arranged by IUCN Commission on Ecosystem Management and international conference symposia (20-100 participants) formed part of a broad consultation process,  held at the following locations and dates:

* London, UK May 2017– IUCN workshop/meeting
* Cartagena, Colombia July 2017 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Cartagena, Colombia July 2017 – [ICCB symposium](https://conbio.org/images/content_conferences/ICCB2017_Abstract_Book_web_w_doi.pdf)
* Naypyidaw, Myanmar, Sept 2017 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Newcastle, Australia, November 2017 – ESA symposium
* Canberra, Australia, May 2018 – Boden conference
* Davos Switzerland, June 2018 – Polar2018 symposium
* Gland Switzerland June 2018 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Amman, Jordan, Sept 2018 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Dubai, UAE, Oct 2018 – [Eye ON Earth symposium](https://iucnrle.org/blog/rle-eye-on-earth-summit/)
* Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia July 2019 – ICCB symposium
* Maputo, Mozambique, Mar 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Mombasa, Kenya Mar 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* New York, USA, June 2019 – [UN SEEA-EEA forum of experts](https://seea.un.org/events/2019-forum-experts-seea-experimental-ecosystem-accounting)
* Jurmala, Latvia, Sept 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Helsinki, Finland, Oct 2019 – IUCN workshop/meeting
* Sydney, Australia, Nov 2019 – [Ocean Ecosystems Accounting symposium](https://www.unescap.org/events/global-dialogue-ocean-accounting-and-first-annual-meeting-global-ocean-accounts-partnership)

Based on input from working group members and from the participants in consultation meetings, v1.0 of the Global Ecosystem Typology was completed in October 2019, with descriptions and indicative maps for 102 Ecosystem Functional Groups arranged within 25 biomes and five realms. In February 2020, v1.01 of the typology with one additional functional group, was published in a report made available through the [IUCN Red List of ecosystems website](https://iucnrle.org/static/media/uploads/references/research-development/keith_etal_iucnglobalecosystemtypology_v1.01.pdf).

The second phase was an intensive peer review of the descriptive profiles and maps by leading ecosystem scientists whose expertise spanned all biomes in the typology. The peer review process was managed by Associate Professor Emily Nicholson (Deakin University). A total of 48 specialists undertook 235 reviews of profiles.  Their contributions represent the collective views of global research networks numbering hundreds of experts. A comprehensive revision v1.01 of the typology and the descriptive profiles was undertaken in response to reviewer comments. The revisions included the addition of five Ecosystem Functional Groups to the typology to encompass variation that was not well unaccounted for in v1.01, major revisions to profiles of four existing Ecosystem Functional Groups and a large numbers of fine adjustments to the text, diagrams and maps across all remaining Ecosystem Functional Groups. In addition, a global review of map data sets available for ecosystems enabled the coarse-scale indicative maps of EFGs to be replaced with maps of greater spatial resolution, which were standardised to a 30 arc-second latitudinal and longitudinal grid.

The third phase involved testing the typology by developing cross-walks with established national classifications of ecological units. The majority of these classifications were for terrestrial environments based on features of surface vegetation, some were for freshwater environments and a few covered marine environments. The cross-walks were based on expert elicitation. Information on uncertain membership relationships was used to resolve ambiguities in the description of Ecosystem Functional Groups and develop a description for one additional group.

The fourth phase was a further peer review to conform with IUCN’s publication policy. Two experts, one terrestrial specialist and one marine specialist, were engaged to review the entire report including descriptive profiles for Ecosystem Functional Groups within their respective areas of expertise.

The process outlined above involved up to six iterations of review and revision for each descriptive profile, and sometimes involved significant addition of content, revision of group definitions or recognition of additional groups. All profiles were reviewed and edited for conceptual consistency by the lead author, and subject to a final production edit by Dr Lucie Bland.

The ***IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology (v2.0)*** is currently _awaiting publication_ in the IUCN website.

### Related resources

* The [IUCN Red List of Ecosystems official site](https://iucnrle.org/) including [news](https://iucnrle.org/blog/), [media coverage](https://iucnrle.org/press/media-coverage/) and [events](https://iucnrle.org/events/)

* [Context of the Global Ecosystem Typology](https://iucnrle.org/about-rle/ongoing-initiatives/global-ecosystem-typology/)

* Indicative maps are available in a data repository:
 > Keith, David A., Ferrer-Paris, Jose R., Nicholson, Emily, Bishop, Melanie J., Polidoro, Beth A., Ramirez-Llodra, Eva, … Kingsford, Richard T. (2020). *Indicative distribution maps for Ecological Functional Groups - Level 3 of IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology (Version 2.0.0)* [Data set]. **Zenodo**. DOI: [10.5281/zenodo.3546513](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3546513)

## Design & development

Interactive designed and developed by [dumpark information design](//dumpark.com)
