---
layout: default
published: true
permalink: /es/biomes/t_4
content-id: T4
lang: es
title: T4. Savannas and grasslands biome
version: v2.0, 2020-05-31 13:42:41
---

Ecological functions within the Savannas and grasslands biome are closely linked to a mostly continuous ground layer of grasses that contribute moderate to very high levels of primary productivity driven by strongly seasonal water surplus and deficit cycles. 

The timing of the seasonal cycle of productivity varies with latitude and becomes more variable inter-annually as total rainfall declines. The woody component of the vegetation may be completely absent or may vary to a height and stature that resembles that of a forest. In the tropics and subtropics, productivity peaks in the summer when high rainfall coincides with warm temperatures. At temperate latitudes, summer growth is suppressed by water deficits associated with high evapotranspiration, sometimes exacerbated by weakly seasonal (winter-maximum) rainfall, so that productivity peaks in spring when warming temperatures coincide with high soil moisture accumulated over winter. 

Co-existence between trees and grasses and between grasses and interstitial forbs is mediated by herbivory and/or fire. These agents are critical in the top-down regulation of grassy ecosystems and in some cases are involved in feedback mechanisms that mediate regime shifts between alternative stable states. Herbivory is the primary driver in highly fertile and productive systems, whereas fire is the primary driver in less fertile and lower productivity systems. Nutrient gradients are exacerbated volatilisation during fire and the loss of nutrients in smoke. 

The representation of grass species with C<sub>3</sub> and C<sub>4</sub> photosynthetic pathways varies with water availability and temperature over regional and continental climatic gradients. Grasses are rapid responders to seasonal pulses of elevated soil moisture and sustain a complex trophic web with large-bodied mammalian herbivores and their predators. The curing of grasses over the dry season is critical to flammability. Mammal diversity, trophic complexity, and the expression of physical and chemical defences against herbivory also vary with soil fertility
